Understanding Craigslist Rental Scams

Youngsam Park1, Damon McCoy2, and Elaine Shi3

University of Maryland1, New York University2, Cornell University3

Abstract. Fraudulently posted online rental listings, rental scams, have
been frequently reported by users. However, our understanding of the
structure of rental scams is limited. In this paper, we conduct the ﬁrst
systematic empirical study of online rental scams on Craigslist. This
study is enabled by a suite of techniques that allowed us to identify scam
campaigns and our automated system that is able to collect additional
information by conversing with scammers. Our measurement study sheds
new light on the broad range of strategies diﬀerent scam campaigns em-
ploy and the infrastructure they depend on to proﬁt. We ﬁnd that many
of these strategies, such as credit report scams, are structurally diﬀer-
ent from the traditional advanced fee fraud found in previous studies. In
addition, we ﬁnd that Craigslist remove less than half of the suspicious
listings we detected. Finally, we ﬁnd that many of the larger-scale cam-
paigns we detected depend on credit card payments, suggesting that a
payment level intervention might eﬀectively demonetize them.

1

Introduction

Today, many people use the Internet for at least part of their housing search [6].
This inevitably has led to proﬁt-driven scammers posting fake rental listings,
commonly known as “rental scams”. Despite the ubiquitous presence of online
rental scams, we currently lack a solid understanding of the online rental scam
ecosystem and the diﬀerent techniques rental scammers use to deceive and proﬁt
oﬀ their victims. While most eﬀorts to mitigate this problem focus on ﬁltering the
posts, this is only the visible part of a well-honed set of scams and infrastructure
established to extract money from their marks. An end-to-end understanding of a
scam and its structural dependencies (message posting, email accounts, location
of scammers, support companies, automated tools and payment methods) is
often a crucial ﬁrst step towards identifying potential weaknesses along the chain
that can serve as eﬀective choke-points for the defender [8,27]. In particular, this
“understand, and then deter” trajectory has resulted in suggesting weak points
for disrupting other domain-speciﬁc threats, such as payment processing in the
counterfeit software and pharmacy spam domain [8, 18, 19].

In this paper, we conduct the ﬁrst systematic empirical study of the online
rental scams ecosystem as viewed through the lens of the Craigslist rental section.
Our in-depth analysis of these rental scam campaigns allows us to address ques-
tions geared at improving our understanding of the supporting infrastructure
with the goal of exploring alternate points to undermine this ecosystem, such

as: “What are the common underlying scams?”, “Where are these scammers
located and what tools do they use?”, “How eﬀective are current defences?”,
“What payment methods do they use?”. We summarize our contributions and
ﬁndings below.

By developing several eﬀective detection techniques, we are able to identify
several major rental scam campaigns on Craigslist. In addition, we extend Scam-
baiter automated conversation engine [21] to automatically contact suspected
rental scammers, which enabled us to understand what support infrastructure
they used and how they were monetizing their postings. In total we detected
about 29K scam listings over the 20 cities we monitored, within a period of 141
days.

We ﬁnd a diverse set of methods utilized for monetizing the rental scam
campaigns we identiﬁed. These include attempts to trick people into paying
for credit reports and “bait-and-switch” rental listings. When we explored the
payment method used, ﬁve of the seven major scam campaigns identiﬁed used
credit cards. Many campaigns also depended on businesses registered in the USA
to collect payments. We also ﬁnd that Craigslist’s ﬁltering methods are currently
removing less than half of the rental scam ads we detected.

Our results highlight the fact that scammers are highly customizing their
monetization methods to the United States rental market. They also expose new
scams and infrastructure that were not encountered in previous studies [7,15,21].
This diﬀerence highlights the need to understand a wider range of scam domain
and suggests potential bottlenecks for many rental scam monetizing strategies
at the regulatory and payment layers. For instance, United States regulatory
agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) could investigate these
companies and levy ﬁnes for their deceptive advertising practices. Another po-
tential method of demonetizing these companies might be to alert credit card
holder associations, such as Visa or MasterCard, to these merchants’ deceptive
billing and refund policies.

2 Data Sets

This paper focuses solely on scams and we consider spam, such as oﬀ-topic and
aggressive repostings, as outside the scope of this paper. In this paper, we deﬁne
a rental listing as a scam if i) it is fraudulently advertising a property that is not
available or not lawfully owned by the advertiser and ii) it attempts to extract
money from replies using either advanced fee fraud or “bait-and-switch” tactics.
The basis of our study relies upon repeated crawls of the rental section on
Craigslist in diﬀerent geographic locations to collect all listings posted in these
regions and detect listings that are subsequently ﬂagged. We then use a com-
bination of manual searching for reported rental scams and human-generated
regular expressions to map fraudulent listings into scam campaigns. For a small
subset of listings that are diﬃcult to identify as scams or legitimate, we build an
automated conversation engine that contacts the poster to determine the valid-
ity of the listing. Finally, we crawl ﬁve other popular rental listing sites to detect
cloned listings that have been re-posted to Craigslist potentially by scammers.

Overview

Duration
Cities/areas

Rental ads

Total posted
Flagged for removal
Deleted (by user)
Expired*

141 days (2/24/14-7/15/14)

20

2, 085, 663

126, 898 (6.1%)
338, 362 (16.2%)
1, 620, 403 (77.7%)

Table 1: Dataset summary. About 6% of rental ads are ﬂagged for removal by
Craigslist. Rental ads are considered to be expired 7 days after being posted.

2.1 Rental Listing Crawling

Our primary data set is based on listings collected from daily crawls of rental sec-
tions on Craigslist across 20 diﬀerent cities and areas in the United States with
the largest population [5]: New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston, Philadel-
phia, San Antonio, San Diego, Dallas, San Francisco (Bay area), Austin, Jack-
sonville, Indianapolis, Columbus, Charlotte, Detroit, El Paso, Memphis, Boston
and Seattle. Our crawler revisited each crawled ad three days after the ﬁrst visit
to detect if they have been ﬂagged by Craigslist. The crawler performed a ﬁnal
recrawl of any unﬂagged listings 7 days after the ﬁrst visit to determine if they
have been ﬂagged or expired. We also collected rental ads from ﬁve additional
major rental listing websites, Zillow, Trulia, Realtor.com, Yahoo! Homes and
Homes.com.

Our crawler tracked all rental section ads on 20 cities/areas on Craigslist,
for a total duration of 141 days, from 2/24/2014 to 7/15/2014. Table 1 shows
the overall summary of this dataset. In whole, we collected over two million ads,
among which 126, 898 have been ﬂagged by Craigslist.

2.2 Campaign Identiﬁcation

Our crawling of Craigslist produced a large set of ﬂagged and non-ﬂagged ads
that are potentially scam listings. We know that some of these ads are scams and
that many of these are linked to a smaller number of distinct scam campaigns.
Due to the large number of ads in our data set a brute-force approach of
manually analyzing a large set of ads would not be eﬀective and would require
a domain speciﬁc understanding of how scam ads diﬀer from legitimate ads. In
order to overcome these challenges, we bootstrap our knowledge of scam post-
ings by ﬁnding a small number of suspicious ads in a semi-automated manner.
To this end, we manually surveyed a broad range of user submitted scam re-
ports online [1, 3, 4] to gain some initial insights about rental scams. Based on
these insights, we constructed the following heuristics to identify an initial set
of suspicious rental listings:

– Detect suspicious cloned listings by correlating listings posted to Craigslist
with other rental listing websites, in particular, cloned ads from other sites
that exhibit a substantial price diﬀerence.

– Detect posts with similar contents across multiple cities, e.g., posts with the

same phone number or email addresses.

– Focus on ads ﬂagged by Craigslist, and manually identify suspicious scam
listings. As we will report in detail later, not all ﬂagged posts are scam listings;
and conversely, not all scam posts were ﬂagged by Craigslist

– Identify ads that are similar to user-reported scams.

2.3 Campaign Expansion Phase: Latitudinal

For some of the campaigns we identiﬁed and hand labelled a small number of
initial scam posts. Based on these we would like to identify other similar list-
ings that are part of the same campaigns using automated and semi-automated
methods. To this end, we used an approach that uses human-generated scam
signatures.

Human-generated scam signatures. Our ﬁrst approach is to manually in-
spect the handful of ads that we identiﬁed to be in the same campaign, and
summarize a unique signature to identify this campaign. For example, one of the
credit report scam campaigns have the following unique signatures: email ac-
counts corresponding to the regular expression “[a-z]+[ ]@[ ]yahoo[ ](dot)[ ]com”
and no other contact information is included.

We then applied our signatures to all of our crawled ads, to identify additional
ads that belong to the same campaign. As detailed in later sections, we will rely
on a combination of human and automated veriﬁcation techniques to conﬁrm
that scam ads identiﬁed by these signatures are indeed scams.

2.4 Campaign Expansion Phase: Longitudinal

For the initial scam postings we identiﬁed above, and the suspicious listings we
identiﬁed in the latitudinal campaign expansion phase (Section 2.3), we wanted
to conﬁrm whether these are indeed scam messages. To this end, we built an
automated conversation engine to converse with the suspected scammer, to see
if the conversation would lead to a phase where the scammer requested payment
from us.

Automated conversation engine. We manually inspected the suspicious ads
and found that some of them were clearly scams, e.g., the ads with a speciﬁc
phone numbers that were reported as scams by many users. For others, while
the ads appear highly suspicious, we were not sure whether they were scams as
opposed to the more harmless spam posting from aggressive realtors or other
service providers advertising their service/rentals.

We therefore relied on an automated conversation engine to i) verify whether
a suspicious ad is a scam and ii) collect additional data. More speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst selected a few suspicious ads and performed the email conversations manu-
ally. Then it was fairly straightforward to distinguish between legitimate users
and malicious scammers during the email conversation. For example, clone ads
scammers usually wanted to proceed with the rental process online since they

were not in town for good purposes (e.g., serving in mission trip to Africa). From
the preliminary conversations, we were able to generate a set of linguistic fea-
tures (e.g., keywords such as “serving in mission” or rent application templates)
and other types of features (e.g., embedded links to certain redirection servers)
that distinguish rental scammers from other legitimate users.

We ran the automated conversation engine only for the emails selected based
on a predeﬁned set of features. During the email conversations, we were able
to collect additional data such as email accounts, IP addresses, phone numbers,
links and payment information from the scammers. As in [21], the automated
conversation engine embedded an external image link into the emails. Once a
scammer clicks or loads the link in any way, the link leads the scammer to our
private web server that logs the visitor’s IP address. In this way, we were able
to collect the IP addresses of the scammers from two sources: email headers and
access logs to the web server.

Ethics. The longitudinal automation phase is the only part of the data col-
lection that involved human subjects. We took care to design our experiments
to respect common ethical guidelines and received approval from our institu-
tion’s IRB for this study. As mentioned above, sometimes we rely on automated
conversations to conﬁrm (or disconﬁrm) whether scams we identify are truly
scams. To minimize the inconvenience brought on legitimate users, we abided
by the following guidelines. First, we only sent automated emails to ads that we
suspected to be scams. Detailed methods are explained in Section 3.2 and 3.1.
Second, we kept the automated conversations to a low volume. In the entire data
collection, we sent out 2,855 emails, from which we received 204 responses that
were conﬁrmed to be from scammers out of a total of 367 responses. From these
initial results, we were able to improve our methods for detecting suspicious
ads, which would further reduce the number of legitimate posters contacted. Fi-
nally, in some cases we called the phone number provided by the poster in order
to collect additional information. These phone calls where all manually placed,
restricted to low volumes and we only contacted suspected scam posters.

2.5 Campaign Summaries

We present a high-level summary of the major scam categories and campaigns we
identiﬁed in Table 2. For each campaign we assign it a name based on either the
name of the company that is monetizing the scam when known or a feature used
to identify the listings in the campaign. Applying our campaign identiﬁcation
methods from Section 3, we ﬁnd seven distinct scam campaigns that account for
32K individual ads. For each campaign the table lists the monetization category
of the scam, the raw number of listings associated with that campaign, the
percentage of ads that were ﬂagged, the number of cities we found listings in out
of the 20 total cities we monitored and the payment method used.

Scam category Campaign

# Ads % Flagged City Payment

Credit report

CreditReport Yahoo
CreditReport Gmail

15, 184
5, 472

33.0% 20 Credit card
59.3% 9 Credit card

Rent

Clone scam campaigns

85

87.1% 17 Wire transfer

Realtor service

American Standard Online
New Line Equity
Search Rent To Own

3, 240
3, 230
1, 664

62.4% 19 Credit card
43.3% 12 Credit card
77.5% 17 Credit card

Total

28, 875

45.2%

Table 2: Major rental scam campaigns. Rental scam campaigns of relatively large
size in various rental scam types.

3 Analysis of Scam Campaigns

In this section, we will present our detailed ﬁndings for each campaign, including
our insights on how the scams are organized, where they are geographically
located and the degree of automation used by each campaign.

3.1 Credit Report Scams

In a typical credit report scam, a scammer posts a false rental ad for a property
not owned by the scammer. When a victim user replies to the rental ad, the
scammer asks the victim to obtain their credit score by clicking on a link included
in the email. When the victim clicks the link, a scammer-operated redirection
server redirects the victim to a credit score company and includes a referral ID.
If the victim pays for the credit score service which accepts credit card payments,
the scammer will be paid a commission by the credit score company through its
aﬃliate program. 1
Data collection. We identiﬁed initial postings for each campaign by manually
examining the Craigslist-ﬂagged ads, and correlating contact information and
unique substrings included in the postings with user reports found on scam report
sites [1, 3, 4]. In this manner, we identiﬁed two major campaigns, henceforth
referred to as CreditReport Yahoo and CreditReport Gmail respectively, due to
their usage of signature Yahoo and Gmail email addresses.

From the few examples that we found manually, we latitudinally expanded
the campaign dataset through human-generated signatures. Using the human
generated signatures, we were able to identify additional scam ads from the same
campaigns. Craigslist had failed to ﬂag many of the scam ads we identiﬁed.
Speciﬁcally, for CreditReport Yahoo campaign, we found 15,184 scam ads of
which 33.01% were ﬂagged for removal by Craigslist. We also found 5,471 scam
ads posted by CreditReport Gmail of which 59.27% were ﬂagged. More details
are provided in Table 2.

1 According to the aﬃliate program of Rental Veriﬁed, which is used by one
it pays up to $18 per customer.

of the credit report campaigns we found,
https://rentalveriﬁed.com/aﬃliates

CreditReport Yahoo

CreditReport Gmail

Email account found

14,545 from 15,187 ads

Aﬃliated websites

IP addresses

IP addresses used

once

Country

State
ISP

rentalveriﬁed.com,

matchveriﬁcation.com

69

65 (94.2%)

USA (100%)

28 states
Various

1,133 from 5,472 ads
freecreditnation.com,

efreescore.com

30

10 (33.3%)

USA (100%)

New York (100%)

Verizon (100%)

Table 3: Credit report scam campaigns.

Dataset sanity check. We veriﬁed the suspicious ads identiﬁed by the sig-
natures are indeed scams in two ways. First, we performed a sanity check by
manually investigating 400 randomly selected suspicious ads, 200 from each
campaign. We considered a suspicious ad as a scam if 1) an ad contained no
additional contact information such as name, phone number, street address or
URL and 2) there existed same or similar ads with diﬀerent email addresses in
the same campaign. Through the manual inspection, we found only one false
positive ad in CreditReport Yahoo campaign and two in CreditReport Gmail.
The email addresses used in the false positive ads were also found in other sus-
picious ads, and we could also ﬁnd out actual realtors who used those email
addresses. Second, among a total number of 20,256 credit report scam ads we
identiﬁed, we randomly selected 227 and 89 credit report scam ads from the
CreditReport Yahoo and CreditReport Gmail campaigns respectively, and sent
emails in response to the selected ads. Among the emails sent, we received 41
and 78 email responses and all of them were veriﬁed to be credit report scams.

In-depth analysis. We present further analysis results of the two credit re-
port scam campaigns. Both credit report scam campaigns appear to be located
in the United States. In particular, the CreditReport Gmail campaign appears
to be located in New York city; while evidence described later (e.g., diverse IP
addresses and short inter-arrival times within bursts) suggests that the Cred-
itReport Yahoo campaign appears to rely on a botnet for their operation. We
now provide an in-depth analysis of the IP addresses and email accounts of both
campaigns. Table 3 lists the overview of two credit report scam campaigns we
found during the experimental period.

IP address analysis. For both campaigns, all the IP addresses observed are
located in USA. However, two campaigns show completely diﬀerent IP address
usage patterns as shown in Table 3.

For CreditReport Yahoo, 69 IP addresses were found from 41 email conversa-
tions. The number of observed IP addresses are much larger than the number of
corresponding email conversations since CreditReport Yahoo uses mostly diﬀer-
ent IP addresses for each round of conversations. In addition, they rarely reuse
any IP addresses across diﬀerent email conversations. 94.64% are used only in a

# Emails in

Burst

burst

duration (sec)

Mean

inter-arrival

time (sec)

# Cities

# IP

locations

7
4
4
3
3

62
67
74
9
11

10.3
22.3
24.7
4.5
5.5

5
3
3
3
3

7
4
4
3
3

Table 4: Example inter-arrival time for burst email responses of CreditRe-
port Yahoo. Emails in the same burst have diﬀerent content, although they contain
a similar embedded link to a direction server.

single email conversation, and every IP address is used in at most two email con-
versations. The IP addresses are distributed over 24 states in USA and mapped
back to residential ISPs. These observations, combined with others described
later (e.g., level of automation), suggest that this campaign is potentially using
a botnet for operation.

In the case of the CreditReport Gmail campaign, 30 IP addresses were found
from 78 email conversations. Of the 30 IP addresses, about 66.7% were reused in
more than one email conversations and the maximum number of email threads
that share the same IP address is 7. All the observed IP addresses of the Cred-
itReport Gmail campaign are located in New York City, and map back to a
single ISP, Verizon Online LLC.

Level of automation. We observed many signs of scam process automation,
including extremely short inter-arrival time in a burst of emails and duplicate
or templated email messages. Table 4 lists example email bursts received from
CreditReport Yahoo campaign. Many email bursts consisting of up to 7 emails
were observed and an average inter-arrival time between two emails ranges be-
tween 4.5 seconds and 24.7 seconds. Within each burst, emails were always sent
from diﬀerent IP addresses and therefore, usually sent from diﬀerent cities. This
observation also supports the use of the widely-deployed botnet. We also ob-
served many duplicate or templated emails from both campaigns, which are also
strong signs of automation. Example email message frequently observed during
the whole experiment is shown in Figure 4 in Appendix B.

On the other hand, we also observed signs of manual labor. One example is
a distribution of time of day that we received email messages from scammers. In
the case of CreditReport Yahoo, we never received any email response between 7
PM and 9 AM EST (Eastern Standard Time) and in case of CreditReport Gmail,
there was no response between 8 PM and 7 AM EST.

3.2 Clone Scam

In clone scams, typically a scammer copies another legitimate rental ad from a
diﬀerent rental website, e.g., realtor.com. The cloned ad typically has the same
street address and sometimes has the same description as the original ad. How-
ever, often the scammer lowers the rental price. This scam is typically mone-

tized by the scammer requesting a money wire transfer or bank transfer for ﬁrst
months rent and a deposit.

Data collection. To detect clone scams, our crawler tracked rental posts on
Craigslist and 5 other major rental websites. We compared these ads and iden-
tiﬁed Craigslist rental ads cloned from other websites.

Overall, we identiﬁed 22,852 cloned ads spanning all 20 cities on Craigslist –
however, not all of these are necessarily scam ads. The majority of these appear
to be legitimate users advertising their rentals on multiple websites. We then
focused on the subset of 2,675 cloned ads with a price diﬀerence of at least $300.
These ads are deemed to be suspicious, but we still cannot be sure whether they
are truly scam ads. To verify whether the identiﬁed suspicious ads are truly
scams, we sent 2, 517 emails to suspicious ads using our automated conversation
engines. From the emails we sent, we received 237 responses among which 85 are
veriﬁed to be scams.

In-depth analysis of conﬁrmed scams. We now report statistics on the 85
conﬁrmed clone scams. Our major insight is that most of these scams originate
from Nigeria, and are likely operated by a small number of scam factories. To
reach this conclusion, we performed a detailed analysis of the IP addresses, email
addresses, wire transfer requests and bank account information contained in the
scam attempts. We then performed a clustering algorithm based on identifying
information.

IP address analysis. Excluding IPs from well-known web mail provider,
such as Gmail and Microsoft, we observed a total of 89 unique IP addresses
located in 7 countries. We used DB-IP database [2] to geolocate each IP address
oﬄine in order to prevent the leakage of the scammer’s IP address information
that would result from using an online service. 66.29% of the collected IP ad-
dresses are from Nigeria and 15.73% were from the U.S. The result shows fairly
similar trend compared to the result of the previous study by Park et al. [21]
which shows 50.3% and 37.6% of IP addresses of Nigerian sales scammers were
from Nigeria and the U.S. Even though we consider the possibility of proxies
or anonymous networks, the consistent results from two studies strongly imply
that the major number of the scammers were actually located in Nigeria.

Payment Request Analysis. From our conversations with clone ad posters,
we collected a total of 12 unique payment requests and 8 duplicated requests for
the same name or bank account. Interestingly, the proportion of payment re-
quest geolocation is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of IP geolocation. 41.67%
of requests are located in the US while 25% are located in Nigeria. For a money
transfer via Western Union or MoneyGram, a sender needs to specify the re-
ceiver’s location information including street address, city and country. However,
due to the small sample size of payment requests it is unclear if there is any bias
in the subset of conversations that resulted in a payment request versus those
for which we were able to collect an IP address.

Phone number analysis. We collected a total of 22 distinct phone numbers
from 24 email threads. 64% of the phone numbers are registered in the USA,

Group Ads (%) Email accounts Bank accounts Phone numbers

1
2
3

31 (36%)
16 (19%)

6 (7%)

Others

32 (38%)

Total

85

21
16
6
29

70

4
2
0
5

11

Table 5: Top 3 clone scam groups.

9
3
2
8

22

but half of these are identiﬁed as VoIP numbers. The rest (36%) were registered
in Nigeria.

Clustering. In order to better understand how scammers are organized,
we clustered the emails messages into groups based on similarities of their at-
tributes. We used a conservative clustering strategy. Any two email threads are
classiﬁed into a same group only if they shared one of the following: exactly
the same email accounts, phone numbers, bank accounts, IP addresses or rent
application templates. Since those attributes provide us with fairly explicit clues
for clustering, we are highly conﬁdent of our clustering result. The result sug-
gests that these clone scammers are likely to originate from a small number of
scam factories. Through the clustering, we found a total of 15 scammer groups.
Among them the top 3 groups account for 72% of all observed email threads.
More detailed information of the top 3 groups are illustrated in Table 5. While
IP addresses of the second and third groups are largely located in Nigeria, those
of the ﬁrst group are spread over Nigeria, the US, Malaysia and Egypt.

3.3 Realtor service scam

Realtor service scams involve a special type of realtor service, such as pre-
foreclosure rental or rent-to-own rental. This type of rental is attractive to
renters, since they may be able to own the property while paying monthly rent
similar to the usual monthly rent of the same area. Realtor service scam cam-
paigns usually request a victim to sign up for a private realtor service to get a
list of rent-to-own rentals or pre-foreclosure rentals. To sign up for the service,
the victim needs to pay up to $200 initial fee and/or $40 monthly fee.

While these businesses actually provide their customers with a list of homes,
their rental ads are still considered scams since the ads are typically fake with
unreasonably low rent prices, and/or for properties they do not own. Moreover,
many user scam reports claim that in most cases, the properties in the provided
list are not even for rent or sale at all. In addition, the refund process is extremely
diﬃcult but this is not explained clearly before the customer signs up for their
services.

Data Collection. As listed in Table 2, we found a total of 8,134 realtor service
scam ads over all 20 cities of Craigslist, and about 57% of the ads were ﬂagged by
Craigslist. Through the manual inspection on the crawled Craigslist rental ads,
we found several phone numbers and URLs observed frequently across multiple

American

Standard Online

New Line Equity

Scam Signatures

20 phone numbers

22 phone numbers

Search Rent To

Own

5 URLs

Payment

Initial fee ($199)

Initial fee ($9.95),

Monthly fee ($40.95)

Initial fee ($109.95),
Monthly fee ($39.95)

BBB rating

F

Not found

Not found. (C/F*)

Table 6: Realtor service with advance fee campaigns. *: BBB rating of the
sibling websites.

cities on Craigslist. We then extended the initial sets of phone numbers and
URLs by correlating them with various user scam reports [1, 3, 4]. Based on the
human generated signatures of phone numbers and URLs, we identiﬁed three
large realtor services with advance fee campaigns: American Standard Online,
New Line Equity and Search Rent To Own.

Among the three campaigns we found, two were identiﬁed by sets of phone
numbers and the other campaign was identiﬁed by a set of URLs. For the sound-
ness of the collected phone numbers, we manually called each number and con-
ﬁrmed a set of numbers actually belong to a same campaign. We conﬁrmed that
all phone numbers of a single campaign leaded us to the same automatic response
system. Then we conversed with a representative over the phone and conﬁrmed
the business name of each campaign. Table 6 lists three large realtor services
scam campaigns.

American Standard Online. American Standard Online (ASO) was identiﬁed
based on a total of 20 phone numbers. We gathered the set of phone numbers
from our suspicious phone number detection method and many other sources
such as 800notes.com. Using the set of phone numbers, we found 3,240 rental
ads posted by ASO over 19 cities on Craigslist. Among them, 62.34% were ﬂagged
for removal. Their ads oﬀer rentals with much lower rent prices than other ads in
the same area. However, a user is not able to get the information of the property
from ASO representatives on the phone.

Because ASO is a registered company in the USA, we could ﬁnd their record
from Better Business Bureau (BBB). BBB website shows that the company ASO
has a total of 302 customer complaints and its rating is at the lowest ‘F’. The
record obviously tells us that doing business with ASO could be highly risky.
This also means that the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) could potentially
investigate this company and enforce ﬁnes or criminal penalties that would de-
monetize this campaign.

According to many user scam reports, the scam process of ASO is as follows.
If a victim calls the number to ask about the rental ad, ASO never answers the
questions about the rental ads. Instead, ASO requests a payment of $199 for
an initial fee to get an access to their pre-foreclosure (or rent-to-own) property
database. Once the victim signs up for the service, ASO provides the victim with
a property list. Due to the nature of the term “pre-foreclosure”, it is usually un-

certain that the properties in the list are actually in the status of pre-foreclosure,
and most of them turns out to be not for rent or sale.

At the time of contract, ASO lures victims by guaranteeing 100% refund
after 90 days from the contract in case ASO does not satisfy their customers.
However, their actual refund policy requires a wait of at least 90 days from the
contract and at least 3 denial letters from the owners of the properties in the
provided list. It is obvious that getting the multiple denial letters is extremely
diﬃcult.

New Line Equity. New Line Equity (NLE) is an another campaign which
provides a special type of realtor service. We identiﬁed NLE based on 22 phone
numbers observed over 12 cities. Based on the set of phone numbers, a total of
3,230 NLE rental scam ads were identiﬁed, and 43.34% of them were ﬂagged.

Many user reports claim that the scam process of NLE is quite similar to
that of ASO. A victim calls the number found in a Craigslist rental ads, and
NLE requests an initial fee $9.95 and monthly fee $40.95. Once the victim makes
a payment, NLE provides him with a list of pre-foreclosure properties. In many
cases, however, it turns out that most of the listed properties are not for rent
or sale. We could not ﬁnd a record of NLE from BBB, but there exists a record
with a similar business name, New Line of Equity which has a BBB rating of ‘D’.
Many user reports complain about the diﬃculties in terminating the monthly
fee payment.

Search Rent To Own. We identiﬁed Search Rent To Own (SRO) based on ﬁve
URLs frequently observed over 17 cities on Craigslist. Among the ﬁve URLs, one
was used as the main URL and the rest were redirection links to the main URL.
Based on the set of URLs, we identiﬁed 1,664 SRO rental scam ads of which
77.46% of them were ﬂagged. Similarly to the other two campaigns, SRO posts
false rental ads on Craigslist and ask the victims to sign up their services with
initial and monthly fees. The BBB record of this campaign did not exist but we
found the records of two sibling websites listed in SRO website. BBB rating of
those two sibling websites were ‘F’ and ‘C’, which are poor ratings for legitimate
businesses.

According to the user reports, SRO ﬁrst lures a customer by oﬀering 3-day
free trial service. However, SRO does not fully explain that a $39.95 monthly
fee will be charged automatically after the free trial. We found many customer
complains indicating that they were not notiﬁed upfront about the fact that
monthly fee would be charged automatically after the free trial.

4 Flagged Ads Analysis

Currently, Craigslist relies on a ﬂagging mechanism to ﬁlter out scam and spam
ads. Our measurement study reveals that Craigslist currently ﬂags only about
47% of all the scam ads that we identiﬁed. Further, for a subset of the scams
(speciﬁcally, clone scams) that we closely monitored, the median time till ﬂagging
(for the ads that do get ﬂagged) is about 13 hours – see Figure 1. The ﬁgure

Category Campaigns

# Ads (%)

Scams

Credit report

scam

Clone scam

Realtor service

scam

Local ads

Spams

Credit repair ads

Legitimate
rental ads

8, 255 (6.51%)

74 (0.06%)

4, 572 (3.60%)

76, 752 (60.48%)
2, 234 (1.76%)

10, 224 (8.06%)

Total

126, 898

Unidentiﬁed

24, 787 (19.53%)
(−%)
Table 7: Flagged ads categorization.
10.17% of ﬂagged ads are identiﬁed as scams
while 70.30% are identiﬁed as spams.

Fig. 1: Time taken to ﬂag scam
clone ads. Our system monitored
85 clone scam ads and found that
among the ﬂagged ads, only 40%
were ﬂagged within 10 hours from ad
posting time. In addition, about 60%
were ﬂagged within a day.

also shows that roughly 60% of clone scam ads remain active for more than 10
hours and 40% remain active for more than 20 hours.

For other scam categories, our data collection method did not allow us to
obtain the time of ﬂagging due to limitations of our measurement study: First,
monitoring all ads on a per-hour basis would generate too much traﬃc, and
our experiments were designed to keep our crawler’s traﬃc volume low. Second,
detecting these unknown scams required some manual eﬀort. Hence, for some
scam categories, we did not identify the scam ads soon enough to allow us to
monitor them on a per-hour basis.

Even though revisiting all ads on a per-hour basis is too aggressive, we were
able to revisit all ads we crawled twice after three and seven days to determine
whether they have been ﬂagged. Table 7 presents a summary of the composition
of the Craigslist-ﬂagged ads. Of 126,898 Craigslist-ﬂagged ads, we found about
10.2% are Scams where we found concrete proof of scams via automated email
conversation. On the other hand, about 70.3% are classiﬁed as Spams which
consists of local ads that are found usually within a single cities and a few renown
legitimate real estate companies. This leaves 24,787 (19.5%) ads as Unidentiﬁed
where we were not able to ascertain if the ads were benign or malicious. Some of
these could be clone ads or other lower volume Rent scams, but they are unlikely
to be part of a higher volume template-based campaign based on the diversity
of their content.

5 Discussion
This section will serve to provide a higher level view of our analysis to put into
context the value of this study and potential limitations.

Potential detection and conversation limitations. The heuristics we used
to detect and validate scam posting were highly accurate based on our analysis.
However, it still leaves the question of how many scam listings we did not detect.
Without ground truth we cannot provide an estimate for this question. A fair set

010203040506070Elapsed time (hours)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Cumulative percentage of flagged adsMedian: 13 hoursof assumptions is that our heuristics performed well at detecting the majority
of listings associated with larger templated campaigns and worse on the cloned
and manually generated rent scam listings, due to the fact that it is diﬃcult to
detect these based on the contents of the listing. In spite of this, we do detect
some cloned ads and are able to gain an understanding of the structure of their
scams from our conversations with these scammers.

Similarities and diﬀerences with other study. Park et al. [21] focused on
understanding the structure of scammers posing as buyers on Craigslist. The
study found that 70% of scammers provided physical shipping addresses located
in Nigeria. Furthermore, the study found evidence of a largely manual work force
that would respond to scams within 1-2 days during peak work hours in Nigeria.
In this study, we ﬁnd a diversity of scams that depend on diﬀerent sets of
infrastructure as well as rent scammers that are structured similarly to those
that were encountered in their study. The credit report scams depend on credit
report companies in the United States that operate aﬃliate programs and payout
commissions for generating sales. The “bait-and-switch” campaigns depend on
rental service businesses that are often incorporated in the United States and
accept credit card payments with deceptive refund and re-billing policies.

6 Related Works
Advanced fee fraud. There have been a number of previous studies that have
looked at the structure by Smith [23], Buchanan and Grant [7] and estimated
losses from advance fee fraud by Dyrud [9]. Whitty and Buchaman [29] and
Rege [22] have investigated the dynamics of online dating scams. More closely
related to our domain, Johnson [15] explored the oﬄine methods of real es-
tate scammers. More broadly, Stajano and Wilson [24] created a taxonomy
of the diﬀerent types of psychology motivations used by scammers. Garg and
Nilizadeh [11] investigated whether economic, structural and cultural character-
istics of a community aﬀects the scams on Craigslist. Tive [28] introduced in his
study various techniques of advance fee fraud. Herley [12] has argued that Nige-
rian scammers deliberately craft their messages to be unbelievable as a method
of reducing the number of replies from people that are unlikely to fall victim
to these scams. In contrast, our study aimed to be more focused on collecting
empirical data to enable a data-driven analysis of rental scams that does not
rely on self reported statistics.

Goa et al. [10] investigates the use of ontology-based knowledge engineering
for Nigerian scam email text mining. Isacenkova et al. [14] analyzed public scam
email datasets mostly aggregated from numerous user reports. They identiﬁed
over 1,000 diﬀerent scam campaigns largely based on phone numbers. Huang et
al. [13] measured romance scammer techniques on dating websites. Most recently,
Park et al. [21] created Scambaiter, a measurement infrastructure that can au-
tomatically converse with scammers that reply to sales listings and performed
an analysis of the methods and structure of these groups of scammers. Our work
builds on this, but focuses on scammers that are posting fraudulent rental lists
targeting people seeking housing on Craigslist. Unlike previous studies, our in-

vestigation we have focused on 1) understanding in-depth the modi operandi
and infrastructure leveraged by rental scammers operating on Craigslist, and 2)
identifying methods to detect larger-scale scam campaigns and scammers that
are engaged in posting fraudulent rental lists.

Underground studies. Another large body of recent work has set about con-
ducting empirical measurements to understand the dynamics and economic un-
derpinnings of diﬀerent types of cybercrime. Much of this work has been focused
on spam email [16, 25], illicit online pharmacies [20], and mapping out scam
hosting infrastructure [17, 26]. Our work builds on this, but focuses deeply on
fraudulent rental lists in particular. We have conducted, to our knowledge, the
ﬁrst large scale empirical measurement study of fraudulent rental lists. It pro-
vides us with insights into how these scams are monetized and how they might
be better detected in the future.

7 Conclusion and Future Work
Rental scams on Craigslist are a real threat encountered by many people search-
ing for housing online; we found about 29K rental scam postings on Craigslist
across 20 major cities in 141 days. These fraudulent postings are designed to at-
tract people interested in locating housing and target them with scams tailored
to the rental domain. Based on our analysis of these scams we have identiﬁed
a few potential chokepoints in rental scams that merit further investigation.
We also note that analysis of online rental markets in other countries would be
beneﬁcial to improving our understanding of rental scams in other locations.

Craigslist’s detection methods. Based on our analysis Craigslist removed
87% of the cloned ad postings we detected, after an average delay of around
10 hour. Their ﬂagging rate for the larger templated campaign postings was
far lower at 50%. As future work, we plan to investigate automated detection
approaches to improve ﬁltering.

Regulatory and payment follow up. As future work, we plan to contact the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and card holder associations, such as Visa
and MasterCard to inform them of our ﬁndings. We also, plan to perform test
purchases from merchants to understand which banks they are contracting with
to process credit card transactions.

Expanding to other countries. Many of these scams were speciﬁc to the
United States. We plan to expand our studies to other countries in order to
understand how scammers adapt their methods to other regions.

Conclusion. In this paper, we presented a systematic empirical measurement
study of rental scams observed on Craigslist. As part of this study we present
techniques that are eﬀective at identifying rental scam postings and classify-
ing them into larger scam campaigns. In parallel, we contacted a subset of these
scammers to gain detailed information about the infrastructure required for them
to proﬁt. In total we identify seven major rental scam campaigns of which ﬁve de-
pend on credit card payments for deceptively advertised services and businesses
that are often registered in the United States. Finally, we ﬁnd that ﬁltering ef-

forts by Craigslist remove less than half of the listings we detected. We believe
that our techniques for identifying scam campaigns and understanding of their
infrastructure could provide more eﬀective methods for disrupting rental scams.

Acknowledgements
We thank Markus Jakobsson and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable
feedback. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation grant
CNS-1619620. This work was funded in part by NSF grants CNS-1314857, CNS-
1453634, CNS-1518765, CNS-1514261, a Packard Fellowship, a Sloan Fellowship,
two Google Faculty Research Awards, a VMWare Research Award, and an NSA
Lablet grant.

References

1. 800notes. http://800notes.com/.
2. DB-IP. http://db-ip.com/.
3. Report craigslist Scams. http://reportcraigslistscams.com/.
4. Ripoﬀ Report. http://www.ripoﬀreport.com/.
5. United States Census Bureau. http://www.census.gov/.
6. National association of realtors - ﬁeld guide to quick real estate statistics.

http://www.realtor.org/ﬁeld-guides/ﬁeld-guide-to-quick-real-estate-statistics,
2013.

7. J. Buchanan and A. J. Grant. Investigating and prosecuting Nigerian fraud. United

States Attorneys’ Bulletin, 49(6):39–47, 2001.

8. R. Clayton, T. Moore, and N. Christin. Concentrating correctly on cybercrime
concentration. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on the Economics of
Information Security (WEIS), Delft, Netherlands, June 2015.

9. M. A. Dyrud. I brought you a good news: An analysis of Nigerian 419 letters. In
Proceedings of the 2005 Association for Business Communication Annual Conven-
tion, 2005.

10. Y. Gao and G. Zhao. Knowledge-based Information Extraction: a case study
In Natural Language Processing and

of recognizing emails of Nigerian frauds.
Information Systems. Springer, 2005.

11. V. Garg and S. Nilizadeh. Craigslist Scams and Community Composition: Inves-
tigating Online Fraud Victimization. In International Workshop on Cyber Crime.
IEEE, 2013.

12. C. Herley. Why do Nigerian Scammers say they are from Nigeria? In WEIS, 2012.
13. J. Huang, G. Stringhini, and P. Yong. Quit playing games with my heart: Un-
In Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and

derstanding online dating scams.
Vulnerability Assessment , DIMVA, 2015.

14. J. Isacenkova, O. Thonnard, A. Costin, D. Balzarotti, and A. Francillon. Inside the
scam jungle: A closer look at 419 scam email operations. In Security and Privacy
Workshops (SPW), 2013 IEEE, pages 143–150. IEEE, 2013.

15. C. Johnson. Fakers, breachers, slackers, and deceivers: Opportunistic actors during
the foreclosure crisis deserve criminal sanctions. Capital University Law Review,
40(4), Dec. 2012.

16. C. Kanich, C. Kreibich, K. Levchenko, B. Enright, G. M. Voelker, V. Paxson, and
S. Savage. Spamalytics: An empirical analysis of spam marketing conversion. In
Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on CCS. ACM, 2008.

17. M. Konte, N. Feamster, and J. Jung. Dynamics of online scam hosting infrastruc-

ture. In Passive and Active Network Measurement. Springer, 2009.

18. K. Levchenko, A. Pitsillidis, N. Chachra, B. Enright, M. F´elegyh´azi, C. Grier,
T. Halvorson, C. Kanich, C. Kreibich, H. Liu, D. McCoy, N. Weaver, V. Paxson,
G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage. Click trajectories: End-to-end analysis of the spam
value chain. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2011.

19. D. McCoy, H. Dharmdasani, C. Kreibich, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage. Priceless:
The role of payments in abuse-advertised goods. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
Conference on CCS, CCS ’12, 2012.

20. D. McCoy, A. Pitsillidis, G. Jordan, N. Weaver, C. Kreibich, B. Krebs, G. M.
Voelker, S. Savage, and K. Levchenko. Pharmaleaks: Understanding the business
of online pharmaceutical aﬃliate programs. In USENIX Security symposium, 2012.
21. Y. Park, J. Jones, D. McCoy, E. Shi, and M. Jakobsson. Scambaiter: Understanding

Targeted Nigerian Scams on Craigslist. In NDSS, 2014.

22. A. Rege. What’s love got to do with it? Exploring online dating scams and identity

fraud. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 3(2):494–512, 2009.

23. A. Smith. Nigerian scam e-mails and the charms of capital. Cultural Studies,

23(1):27–47, 2009.

24. F. Stajano and P. Wilson. Understanding scam victims: Seven principles for sys-

tems security. Communications of the ACM, 2011.

25. B. Stone-Gross, T. Holz, G. Stringhini, and G. Vigna. The underground economy
of spam: a botmaster’s perspective of coordinating large-scale spam campaigns. In
Proceedings of the 4th USENIX conference on Large-scale exploits and emergent
threats, LEET’11, pages 4–4, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2011. USENIX Association.

26. B. Stone-Gross, A. Moser, C. Kruegel, E. Kirda, and K. Almeroth. FIRE: FInding
In Proceedings of the Annual Computer Security Applications

Rogue nEtworks.
Conference (ACSAC), Honolulu, HI, December 2009.

27. K. Thomas, D. Huang, D. Wang, E. Bursztein, C. Grier, T. Holt, C. Kruegel,
D. McCoy, S. Savage, and G. Vigna. Framing dependencies introduced by un-
derground commoditization.
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on the
Economics of Information Security (WEIS), Delft, Netherlands, June 2015.

28. C. Tive. 419 scam: Exploits of the Nigerian con man. iUniverse, 2006.
29. M. T. Whitty and T. Buchanan. The online romance scam: A serious cybercrime.

CyberPsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15(3):181–183, 2012.

Appendix A Example scam ads

*Come See this stunning 2 bedroom 2.5 bathroom home*
*Come See this quiet 3 bedroom 2 bathroom rental property* 2014 Deal
*Come See this lovely 1 bed / 1.5 bath rental* Discount for 2014
*Come Lay your eyes upon this wonderful 2 bedroom 1.5 bathroom property*
*Come Lay your eyes upon this gorgeous 1 bed 1 bath place*
*Come Lay your eyes upon this gorgeous 1 bed / 1.5 bath rental*

Fig. 2: Example ad titles with sophisticated templates used by CreditRe-
port Yahoo campaign.

Appendix B Example scam emails

Thanks for emailing me regarding the house is still available, but
presently I’m on business trip to Kuala Lumpur,Malaysia.
...
PLEASE TELL US ABOUT YOURSELF
Full Name__________________________
Home Phone ( )________________________
Cell Phone ( ) ___________________
Date of Birth___________________
Current Address___________________
City____________State______ Zip______
Reasons for Leaving________________Rent $________
Are you married_______________________
How many people will be living in the house___________
Do you smoke____________
Do you have a pet____________
Do you have a car____________
Move In Date____________

Fig. 3: Example rent application template. Clone scam campaigns usually request
a victim to ﬁll out their rent application form.

Hello,
I hope you are having a wonderful day. Here’s some good news: the
apartment’s still available!
...
When you’re ready for a personal appointment, then please go to the link
below and grab your free credit score. We recommend this site because
all of our tenants used it and never had any problems. Just fill out the
form and indicate that you want the score. What is in the report isn’t
important to us, it’s more of a formality to have it on file, to make
sure there are no previous property related issues. You can get your
free credit score at CLICK HERE
Remember, we only need to see the page about the rental history. That’s
all we need to see at the showing. We typically waive the security
deposit with a score of 560+.
...

Fig. 4: Credit report scam email.

