FreeMarket: Shopping for free in Android applications∗

Daniel Reynaud, Eui Chul Richard Shin, Thomas R. Magrino, Edward X. Wu, Dawn Song

University of California, Berkeley

Google recently launched Android Market

In-app
Billing (IAB), a service that allows developers to sell dig-
ital content in their Android applications by delegating the
billing responsibilities to Google. This feature has already
gained immense popularity with developers—16 of the top
20 grossing apps in the Android Market rely on IAB for
generating revenue. However, despite Google’s recommen-
dations for preventing attacks on IAB applications,1 the ma-
jority of applications do not use adequate security measures
to authenticate IAB purchases.

In this work we present the FreeMarket attack, which au-
tomatically identiﬁes and exploits such insecure IAB cod-
ing practices. Our attack produces a rewritten application
for which all in-app purchases succeed without any pay-
ment. The rewritten application retains the full functionality
of the original and can be executed on unmodiﬁed Android
devices. We show that at least 174 applications in the An-
droid Market (more than 50% of the applications we tested)
are vulnerable to this attack.

As part of this work, we develop a translation tool named
Deja, which converts the proprietary Dalvik bytecode used
by Android applications to standard Java bytecode, enabling
the use of the ASM bytecode rewriting library.2 Deja uses
SSA-based dataﬂow analysis to infer the operand types,
which must be explicitly speciﬁed in Java bytecode, and
correctly reasons about important differences between the
two formats (e.g., the bytecode veriﬁcation process).3

In the IAB protocol, Google digitally signs the mes-
sage notifying an application of a successful purchase.
Although Google advises developers to verify this signa-
ture on a remote server before acknowledging the pur-
chase, many applications either do not perform any veri-
ﬁcation or perform the veriﬁcation on the device using the
java.security.Signature.verify API.

The FreeMarket attack exploits this behavior by rewrit-

∗The

full

at
http://droidblaze.cs.berkeley.edu/freemarket.pdf.

available

version

paper

this

of

is

1http://developer.android.com/guide/market/

billing/billing_best_practices.html

2http://asm.ow2.org
3Existing tools for this translation do not properly reason about some
of these differences and consequently produce output that cannot be trans-
lated back to Dalvik bytecode.

ing all calls to java.security.Signature.verify
with a method that always returns true. To enable this
rewriting, it ﬁrst translates the application to Java bytecode
using Deja, then invokes the ASM rewriting library on the
Java bytecode. The rewritten application is translated back
to Dalvik bytecode, then repackaged and signed so that it
can be installed and executed on unmodiﬁed Android de-
vices.

To evaluate the effectiveness of the FreeMarket attack,
we perform the attack on 295 IAB applications from the
Android Market: 126 applications on Android Market’s top-
2000 grossing list and 169 additional randomly-selected ap-
plications. We manually exercise the IAB functionality of
each rewritten application to check whether the attack suc-
ceeded.

Our results indicate that 58.98% (174 applications) are
vulnerable to the attack, and 22.03% (65 applications)
are not vulnerable (i.e.,
the rewritten applications cor-
rectly refused to acknowledge the purchases). We were un-
able to evaluate the remaining 18.98% (56 applications),
which were inoperable after the rewriting. Applications
with greater revenue were less likely to be vulnerable to our
attack, which is not surprising given the greater incentives
for developers of higher-revenue applications to implement
IAB securely despite the increased development costs.

Upon manual inspection, we ﬁnd that most of the appli-
cations unaffected by this attack perform server-side veriﬁ-
cation, in accordance with Google’s recommendations. Sev-
eral applications perform validation in native code (which
our rewriting tool does not handle) or use third-party cryp-
tographic libraries to verify the signature locally.

Given the increasing popularity of IAB, we expect it will
become an increasingly attractive target for attackers. We
strongly recommend that developers use server-side veriﬁ-
cation of cryptographic signatures and techniques to prevent
unauthorized modiﬁcation of code in order to prevent auto-
mated attacks such as FreeMarket.

Acknowledgements. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. 0842695, and the MURI program under Air Force Of-
ﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research Grant Nos. FA9550-08-1-0352
and FA9550-09-1-0539.

