2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

Detecting Hoaxes, Frauds, and Deception in Writing Style Online

Sadia Afroz∗, Michael Brennan∗ and Rachel Greenstadt∗

∗Department of Computer Science

Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104

Emails: sadia.afroz@drexel.edu, mb553@drexel.edu and greenie@cs.drexel.edu

Abstract—In digital forensics, questions often arise
about the authors of documents: their identity, de-
mographic background, and whether they can be
linked to other documents. The ﬁeld of stylometry
uses linguistic features and machine learning tech-
niques to answer these questions. While stylometry
techniques can identify authors with high accuracy in
non-adversarial scenarios, their accuracy is reduced
to random guessing when faced with authors who
intentionally obfuscate their writing style or attempt
to imitate that of another author. While these results
are good for privacy, they raise concerns about fraud.
We argue that some linguistic features change when
people hide their writing style and by identifying
those features, stylistic deception can be recognized.
The major contribution of this work is a method for
detecting stylistic deception in written documents. We
show that using a large feature set, it is possible to
distinguish regular documents from deceptive doc-
uments with 96.6% accuracy (F-measure). We also
present an analysis of linguistic features that can be
modiﬁed to hide writing style.

Keywords-stylometry; deception; machine learn-

ing; privacy;

I. INTRODUCTION

When an American male blogger Thomas Mac-
Master posed as a Syrian homosexual woman
Amina Arraf in the blog “A Gay Girl in Damas-
cus” and wrote about Syrian political and social
issues, several news media including The Guardian
and CNN thought the blog was “brutally honest,”
and published email interviews of Amina1. Even
though no one had ever spoken to or met her and no
Syrian activist could identify her, “Amina” quickly

became very popular as a blogger. When “Amina’s
cousin” announced that she had been abducted by
the Syrian police, thousands of people supported
her on social media and made the US state de-
partment investigate her ﬁctional abduction2. This
scrutiny led to the discovery of the hoax.

The authenticity of a document (or blog post)
depends on the authenticity of its source. Sty-
lometry can help answering the question, “who
is the writer of a particular document?” Many
machine learning based methods are available to
recognize authorship of a written document based
on linguistic style. Stylometry is important to se-
curity researchers as it is a forensics technique that
helps detect authorship of unknown documents. If
reliable, it can be used to provide attribution for
attacks, especially when attackers release mani-
festos explaining their actions. It is also important
to privacy research, as it is necessary to hide the
indications of authorship to achieve anonymity.
Writing style as a marker of identity is not ad-
dressed in current privacy and anonymity tools.
Given the high accuracy of even basic stylometry
systems this is not a topic that can afford to be
overlooked.

In the year 2000, Rao and Rohatgi ques-
tioned whether pseudonymity could provide pri-
vacy, showing that linguistic analysis could identify
anonymous authors on sci.crypt by comparing
their writing to attributed documents in the RFC
database and on the IPSec mailing list [23]. In
the intervening years, linguistic authorship iden-

1http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/

8572884/A-Gay-Girl-in-Damascus-how-the-hoax-
unfolded.html

2http://www.foxnews.com/world/2011/06/07/gay-girl-in-

damascus-blogger-kidnapped-by-syrian-forces/

© 2012, Sadia Afroz. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP.2012.34

461

tiﬁcation techniques have improved in accuracy
and scale to handle over ﬁfty potential authors
with over 90% accuracy [1], and even 100,000
authors with signiﬁcant accuracy [17]. At the same
time there has been an explosion in user-generated
content to express opinions, to coordinate protests
against repressive regimes, to whistle blow, to com-
mit fraud, and to disclose everyday information.

These results have not been lost on the law
enforcement and intelligence communities. The
2009 Technology Assessment for the State of
the Art Biometrics Excellence Roadmap (SABER)
commissioned by the FBI stated that, “As non-
handwritten communications become more preva-
lent, such as blogging, text messaging and emails,
there is a growing need to identify writers not by
their written script, but by analysis of the typed
content [29].”

Brennan and Greenstadt [2] showed that current
authorship attribution algorithms are highly accu-
rate in the non-adversarial case, but fail to attribute
correct authorship when an author deliberately
masks his writing style. Their work deﬁned and
tested two forms of adversarial attacks: imitation
and obfuscation. In the imitation attack, authors
hide their writing style by imitating another author.
In the obfuscation attack, authors hide their writing
style in a way that will not be recognized. Tradi-
tional authorship recognition methods perform less
than random chance in attributing authorship in
both cases. These results were further conﬁrmed
by Juola and Vescovi [10]. These results show that
effective stylometry techniques need to recognize
and adapt to deceptive writing.

We argue that some linguistic features change
when people hide their writing style and by iden-
tifying those features, deceptive documents can be
recognized. According to Undeutsch Hypothesis
[26] “Statements that are the product of experience
will contain characteristics that are generally absent
from statements that are the product of imagina-
tion.” Deception requires additional cognitive effort
to hide information, which often introduces subtle
changes in human behavior [6]. These behavioral
changes affect verbal and written communication.
Several linguistic cues were found to discriminate

ments?

deception?

2) Which linguistic features indicate stylistic

3) Which features do people generally change
in adversarial attacks and which features
remain unchanged?

4) Does stylistic deception share similar char-

acteristics with other deceptions?

5) Are some adversarial attacks more difﬁcult

deceptive communication from truthful communi-
cation. For example, deceivers use fewer long sen-
tences, fewer average syllables per word and sim-
pler sentences than truth tellers [3]. Thus, deceptive
language appears to be less complex and easier
to comprehend. Our analysis shows that though
stylistic deception is not lying, similar linguistic
features change in this form of deception.

The goal of our work is to create a framework
for detecting the indication of masking in writ-
ten documents. We address the following research
questions:

1) Can we detect stylistic deception in docu-

to detect than others?

6) Can we generalize deception detection?
This work shows that using linguistic and con-
textual features, it is possible to distinguish stylistic
deception from regular writing with 96.6% accu-
racy (F-measure) and identify different types of
deception (imitation vs. obfuscation) with 87%
accuracy (F-measure). Our contributions include
a general method for distinguishing stylistic de-
ception from regular writing, an analysis of long-
term versus short-term deception, and the discovery
that stylistic deception shares similar features with
lying-type deception (and can be identiﬁed using
the linguistic features used in lying detection).

We perform analysis on the Brennan-Greenstadt
adversarial dataset and a similar dataset collected
using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)3. We show
that linguistic cues that can detect stylistic decep-
tion in the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt adversar-
ial dataset can detect indication of masking in the
documents collected from the Ernest Hemingway
and William Faulker imitation contests. We also

3https://mturk.amazon.com

462

show how long-term deceptions such as the blog
posts from “A Gay Girl in Damascus” are different
from these short-term deceptions. We found these
deceptions to be more robust
to our classiﬁer
but more vulnerable to traditional stylometry tech-
niques.

The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. In section 2, we discuss related works in
adversarial stylometry. Section 3 explains how de-
ception detection is different from regular author-
ship recognition. Section 4 describes our analytic
approach of detecting deception. In section 5, we
describe our data collection methods and datasets.
We follow with our results of detecting deception
on different datasets in Section 6 and discuss their
implications in Section 7.

II. RELATED WORK

The classic example in the ﬁeld of stylometry
is the Federalist Papers. 85 papers were published
anonymously in the late 18th century to persuade
the people of New York to ratify the American
Constitution. The authorship of 12 of these papers
was heavily contested [18]. To discover who wrote
the unknown papers, researchers have analyzed the
writing style of the known authors and compared
it to that of the papers with unknown authorship.
The features used to determine writing styles have
been quite varied. Original attempts used the length
of words, whereas later attempts used pairs of
words, vocabulary usage, sentence structure, func-
tion words, and so on. Most studies show the author
was James Madison.

Several resources give an overview of stylometry
methods [14], [28], and describe the state of the
ﬁeld as it relates to computer science and computer
linguistics [11] or digital forensics [5]. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence has been embraced in the ﬁeld of
stylometry, leading to more robust classiﬁers using
machine learning and other AI techniques [9], [27].
There has also been some work on circumvent-
ing attempts at authorship attribution [12], [23],
using stylometry to deanonymize conference re-
views [16], and looking at stylometry as a method
of communication security [4], but these works
do not deal with malicious attempts to circum-

vent a speciﬁc method. Some research has looked
at
imitation of authors. Somers [25] compared
the work of Gilbert Adair’s literary imitation of
Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland, and found
mixed results. Other work looks into the impact
of stylometry on pseudonymity [23] and author
segmentation [1].

Most authorship recognition methods are built
on the assumption that authors do not make any
intentional changes to hide their writing style.
These methods fail to detect authorship when this
assumption does not hold [2], [10]. The accuracy of
detecting authorship decreases to random guessing
in the case of adversarial attacks.

Kacmarcik and Gamon explored detecting ob-
fuscation by ﬁrst determining the most effective
function words for discriminating between text
written by Hamilton and Madison, then modifying
the feature vectors to make the documents appear
authored by the same person. The obfuscation
was then detected with a technique proposed by
Koppel and Scher, “unmasking,” that uses a series
of SVM classiﬁers where each iteration of clas-
siﬁcation removes the most heavily weighted fea-
tures. The hypothesis they put forward (validated
by both Koppel and Scher [13] and Kacmarcik
and Gamon [12]) is that as features are removed,
the classiﬁer’s accuracy will slowly decline when
comparing two texts from different authors, but
accuracy will quickly drop off when the same is
done for two texts by the same author (where
one has been modiﬁed). It is the quick decline in
accuracy that shows there is a deeper similarity
between the two authors and indicates the unknown
document has most likely been modiﬁed.

However, the above work has some signiﬁcant
limitations. The experiments were performed on
modiﬁed feature vectors, not on modiﬁed docu-
ments or original documents designed with obfus-
cation in mind. Further, the experiments were lim-
ited to only two authors, Hamilton and Madison,
and on the Federalist Papers data set. It is unclear
whether the results generalize to actual documents,
larger author sets and modern data sets.

We analyzed the differences between the control
and deceptive passages on a feature-by-feature

463

basis and used this analysis to determine which
features authors often modify when hiding their
style, designing a classiﬁer that works on actual,
modern documents with modiﬁed text, not
just
feature vectors.

III. DIFFERENCE WITH REGULAR AUTHORSHIP

RECOGNITION

Our classiﬁer

Deception detection is challenging because
though authorship recognition is a well-studied
problem, none of the current algorithms are robust
enough to detect stylistic deception and perform
close to random chance if the author changes his
usual writing style. This problem is quite dif-
ferent from distinguishing one author’s samples
from others. In supervised authorship recognition,
a classiﬁer is trained on the sample documents of
different authors to build a model that is speciﬁc
to each author. In deception detection, we trained
a classiﬁer on regular and deceptive documents
to model the generic characteristic of regular and
deceptive documents.
is

trained on the Extended-
Brennan-Greenstadt dataset where participants
spent 30 minutes to an hour on average to write
documents in a style different from their own.
Our test set also consists of imitated documents
from the Ernest Hemingway and William Faulkner
imitation contests. We investigated the effect of
long-term deception using obfuscated documents
from a deceptive blog. The skill
levels of the
participants in these datasets are varied. In the
Brennan-Greenstadt dataset, the participants were
not professional writers and they had a pre-
speciﬁed topic to develop a different writing style,
but authors in the imitation contests and ﬁctional
blog were mostly professional writers and had
enough time and chose a topic of their choice
to express themselves in a different voice other
than their own. The fact that the classiﬁer, trained
on the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt dataset, can
detect deception in the test sets—though at lower
accuracy—generalizes the underlying similarity
among different kinds of deception.

IV. ANALYTIC APPROACH

Our goal is to determine whether an author has
tried to hide his writing style in a written document.
In traditional authorship recognition, authorship of
a document is determined using linguistic features
of an author’s writing style. In deceptive writing,
when an author is deliberately hiding his regular
writing style, authorship attribution fails because
the deceptive document lacks stylistic similarity
with the author’s regular writing style. Though
recognizing correct authorship of a deceptive doc-
ument is hard, our goal is to see if it is possible
to discriminate deceptive documents from regular
documents.

To detect adversarial writing, we need to identify
a set of discriminating features that distinguish
deceptive writing from regular writing. After de-
termining these features, supervised learning tech-
niques can be used to train and generate classiﬁers
to classify new writing samples.

A. Feature selection

The performance of stylometry methods depends
on the combination of the selected features and
analytical techniques. We explored three feature
sets to identify stylistic deception.

Writeprints feature set: Zheng et al. pro-
posed the Writeprints features that can represent an
author’s writing style in relatively short documents,
especially in online messages [30]. These “kitchen
sink” features are not unique to this work, but
rather represent a superset of the features used in
the stylometry literature. We used a partial set of
the Writeprints features, shown in Table I.

Our adaptation of the Writeprints features con-
sists of three kinds of features: lexical, syntactic,
and content speciﬁc. The features are described
below:

Lexical

features: These features include both
character-based and word-based features. These
features represent an author’s lexicon-related writ-
ing style: his vocabulary and character choice.
The feature set includes total characters, special
character usage, and several word-level features
such as total words, characters per word, frequency
of large words, unique words.

464

Syntactic features: Each author organizes sen-
tences differently. Syntactic features represent an
author’s sentence-level style. These features in-
clude frequency of function words, punctuation and
parts-of-speech (POS) tagging. We use the list of
function words from LIWC 2007 [19].

Content Speciﬁc features: Content speciﬁc fea-
tures refer to keywords for a speciﬁc topic. These
have been found to improve performance of au-
thorship recognition in a known context [1]. For
example, in the spam context, spammers use words
like “online banking” and “paypal;” whereas sci-
entiﬁc articles are likely to use words related to
“research” and “data.”

Our corpus contains articles from a variety of
contexts. It includes documents from business and
academic contexts, for example school essays and
reports for work. As our articles are not from a
speciﬁc context, instead of using words of any
particular context we use the most frequent word
n-grams as content-speciﬁc features. As we are
interested in content-independent analytics, we also
performed experiments where these features were
removed from the feature set.

Table I: Writeprints feature set

Category
Character related

Quantity

90

special

Digits,
characters,
punctuations
Word related

Function words
and
parts-of-
speech

39

156

422

Description
Total characters, percent-
age of digits, percentage
of letters, percentage of
uppercase letters, etc. and
frequency of character un-
igram, most common bi-
grams and tri-grams
Frequency of digits (0-
9), special characters(e.g.,
%,&, *) and punctuations
Total words, number of
characters per word, fre-
quency of
large words,
etc. Most frequent word
uni-/bi-/ tri-grams
frequency
function
words and parts-of-speech

of

Lying-detection feature set: Our feature set
includes features that were known to be effective
in detecting lying type deception in computer me-
diated communications and typed documents [3],

[8]. These features are:

1) Quantity (number of syllables, number of

words, number of sentences),

2) Vocabulary Complexity (number of big

words, number of syllables per word),

3) Grammatical Complexity (number of short
sentences, number of long sentences, Flesh-
Kincaid grade level, average number of
words per sentence, sentence complexity,
number of conjunctions),

4) Uncertainty (Number of words express cer-
tainty, number of tentative words, modal
verbs)

5) Speciﬁcity and Expressiveness (rate of adjec-
tives and adverbs, number of affective terms),
(self-references,
number of ﬁrst, second and third person
pronoun usage).

6) Verbal Non-immediacy

We use the list of certainty, tentative and affective
terms from LIWC 2007 [19].

9-feature set (authorship-attribution fea-
tures): This minimal feature set consists of the
nine features that were used in the neural net-
work experiments in Brennan’s 2009 paper [2].
The features are: number of unique words, com-
plexity, Gunning-Fog readability index, character
count without whitespace, character count with
whitespace, average syllables per word, sentence
count, average sentence length, and Flesch-Kincaid
readability score.

B. Classiﬁcation
We represent each document as ((cid:2)x, y) where
(cid:2)x ∈ Rn is a vector of n features and y ∈
{Regular, Imitation, Obf uscation} is the type
of the document. In our study, n = 9 for 9-
features, n = 20 for lying-detection features and
n = 707 for the Writeprints features. For classiﬁca-
tion, we used Support Vector Machine (SVM) with
Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) [20] im-
plemented in the WEKA tool [7] with a polynomial
kernel. We tested our dataset with other classiﬁers
in the WEKA tool such as k-Nearest Neighbor,
Naive Bayes, J48 Decision Tree, Logistic Regres-
sion and SVM with RBF kernel. We chose to
focus on the SMO SVM as it outperformed other

465

classiﬁers in most of the test cases. The exception
to this is the Lying-detection feature set, in which
a J48 Decision Tree4 outperformed SVMs. J48 is
the JAVA implementation of C4.5 algorithm for
constructing decision tree [22]. It is notable that
the original work using these features also used a
decision tree [3].

V. DATA COLLECTION

We present results on three datasets. The ﬁrst
one is the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt corpus
which contains the Brennan-Greenstadt corpus,
extended with regular, obfuscated and imitated
writing samples of the AMT workers. The second
dataset, which we call the Hemingway-Faulkner
Imitation corpus, contains articles from the Interna-
tional Imitation Hemingway Competition and Faux
Faulkner contest. The last dataset, Thomas-Amina
Hoax corpus, contains blog posts from “A Gay Girl
in Damascus” blog, posts of Thomas MacMaster
in the alternate-history Yahoo! group5 as himself
and as Amina Arraf, and writing samples of Britta
Froelicher, a graduate student at Center for Syrian
Studies at St Andrews, who is also Thomas’s wife.

A. Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt corpus

We used the Brennan-Greenstadt adversarial cor-
pus for this study 6. This dataset consists of two
types of writing samples, regular and adversarial,
from 12 participants. The regular writing contains
approximately 5000 words of pre-existing writing
samples per author. The regular writings are formal
in nature, written for business or academic pur-
poses. In the adversarial writing samples, partici-
pants performed two adversarial attacks: obfusca-
tion and imitation. In the obfuscation attack, each
participant tried to hide his identity while writing
a 500-word article describing his neighborhood. In
the imitation attack, each participant tried to hide
his writing style by imitating Cormac McCarthy’s
writing style in ‘The Road’ and wrote a 500-word
article describing a day of their life in the third
person.

We extended this corpus by collecting similar
writing samples using AMT. We created a Human
Intelligence Task (HIT) where participants were
asked to submit the three kinds of writing sam-
ple described in the previous paragraph 7. After
collecting the data, we manually veriﬁed each sub-
mission and only accepted the ones that complied
with our instructions. 56 participants’ work was
accepted.

Participants were also asked to provide their de-
mographic information. According to the provided
demographic information, all the participants’ na-
tive language is English and all of them have some
college-level degree.

A total of 68 authors’ writing samples are
used in this study, 12 of the authors are from
the Brennan-Greenstadt corpus and others are the
AMT workers.

B. Hemingway-Faulkner Imitation corpus

The Hemingway-Faulkner Imitation corpus con-
sists of the winning articles from the Faux Faulkner
Contest and International Imitation Hemingway
Competition8. The International Imitation Hem-
ingway Competition is an annual writing com-
petition where participants write articles by im-
itating Ernest Hemingway’s writing style. In the
Faux Faulkner Contest participants imitate William
Faulkner’s artistic style of writing, his themes, his
plots, or his characters. Each article is at most
500 words long. We collected all publicly available
winning entries of the competitions from 2000 to
2005. The corpus contains sixteen 500-word ex-
cerpts from different books of Ernest Hemingway,
sixteen 500-word excerpts from different books of
William Faulkner, 18 winning articles from The
International Imitation Hemingway Competition
and 15 winning articles from The Faux Faulkner
Contest.

In the imitation contests, participants chose dif-
ferent topics and imitated from different novels of
the original authors. Table II, III, and IV show im-
itation samples. Cormac McCarthy imitation sam-

4http://weka.sourceforge.net/doc/weka/classiﬁers/trees/J48.html
5http://groups.yahoo.com/group/alternate-history/
6This data set is publicly available at https://psal.cs.drexel.edu

7https://www.cs.drexel.edu/ sa499/amt/dragonauth index.php.
8Available at http://web.archive.org/web/20051119135221/
http://www.hemispheresmagazine.com/ﬁction/2005/hemingway.htm

466

ples are all of same topic but the contest articles
are of varied topics and most of winners were
professional writers.

Table II: Imitation samples from the Extended-
Brennan-Greenstadt dataset.

Cormac McCarthy imitation sample: 1
Laying in the cold and dark of the morning, the man was
huddled close. Close to himself in a bed of rest. Still asleep,
an alarm went off. The man reached a cold and pallid arm
from beneath the pitiful bedspread.
Cormac McCarthy imitation sample: 2
She woke up with a headache. It was hard to tell if what had
happened yesterday was real or part of her dream because it
was becoming increasingly hard to tell the two apart. The day
had already started for most of the world, but she was just
stumbling out of bed. Across the hall, toothbrush, shower.

Table III: Imitation samples from the International
Imitation Hemingway Competition.

Hemingway imitation sample: 1
At 18 you become a war hero, get drunk, and fall in love with
a beautiful Red Cross nurse before breakfast. Over absinthes
you decide to go on safari and on your ﬁrst big hunt you bag
four elephants, three lions, nine penguins, and are warned
never to visit the Bronx Zoo again. Later, you talk about the
war and big rivers and dysentery, and in the morning you
have an urge to go behind a tree and get it all down on paper.
Hemingway imitation sample: 2
He no longer dreamed of soaring stock prices and of the
thousands of employees who once worked for him. He only
dreamed of money now and the lions of industry: John D.
Rockefeller, Jay Gould and Cornelius Vanderbilt. They played
in the darkened boardrooms, gathering money in large piles,
like the young wolves he had hired.

C. Long Term Deception: Thomas-Amina Hoax
corpus

In 2010, a 40-year old US citizen Thomas Mac-
Master opened a blog “A Gay Girl in Damacus”
where he presented himself as a Syrian-American
homosexual woman Amina Arraf and published
blogposts about political and social issues in Syria.
Before opening the blog, he started posting as
Amina Arraf in the alternate-history Yahoo! group
since early 2006. We collected twenty 500-word
posts of Amina and Thomas from the alternate-
history Yahoo! group, publicly available articles
written by Britta Froelicher9 who was a suspect of

9One such article: http://www.joshualandis.com/blog/?p=1831

Table IV:
Faulkner Contest.

Imitation samples

from the Faux

William Faulkner imitation sample: 1
And then Varner Pshaw in the near dark not gainsaying the
other but more evoking privilege come from and out of the
very eponymity of the store in which they sat and the other
again its true I seen it and Varner again out of the near
dark more like to see a mule ﬂy and the other himself now
resigned (and more than resigned capitulate vanquished by the
bovine implacable will of the other) Pshaw in ﬁnal salivary
resignation transﬁxed each and both together on a glowing
box atop the counter.
William Faulkner imitation sample: 2
From a little after breakfast until almost lunch on that long
tumid convectionless afternoon in a time that was unencum-
bered by measure (and before you knew to call it time: when
it was just the great roiling expressionless moment known
only elliptically and without reference to actual clocks or
watches as When We Were Very Young) Piglet, his eyes
neither seeing nor not-seeing, stood motionless as if riveted
to the iron landscape from which he had equally motionlessly
emerged until he became the apotheosis of all
tiny pigs
wearing scarves standing on two legs and doing absolutely
nothing but blinking at what lay before them in the dust.

this hoax and 142 blog posts from “A Gay Girl in
Damacus.” The blog posts were divided into 500-
word chunks. In total we had 248 articles.

VI. EVALUATION AND RESULTS

A. Evaluation Methodology

To evaluate our approach, we perform a three
class classiﬁcation, where the three classes are
Regular, Imitation, and Obfuscation, with three fea-
ture sets. We use 10-fold cross-validation with Sup-
port Vector Maching (SVM) and J48 Decision Tree
classiﬁer. In k-fold cross-validation the original
dataset is randomly partitioned into k equal folds
or subsets. Then the classiﬁer is trained on k-1
subsets and tested on the remaining one subset. The
cross-validation process is then repeated k times
(the folds), with each of the k folds used exactly
once as the validation data. The ﬁnal estimation of
the classiﬁer is the average of the k results from
the folds.

We also split the Writeprints feature set into
three sets, lexical, syntactic, and content speciﬁc
and run the three class classiﬁcation using each set
separately. In this experiment, we show that non-
speciﬁc features are as effective as content speciﬁc

467

features in detecting adversarial attacks.

B. Results

1) Can we detect stylistic deception in docu-
ments?: The results show that a classiﬁer trained
on sets of adversarial and non-adversarial docu-
ments can detect deceptive documents with 96.6%
accuracy on our best feature set, as is shown in
Table V.

The

classiﬁcation was performed on the
Brennan-Greenstadt dataset, Amazon Mechanical
Turk dataset, and Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt
dataset which combines both of the sets. On all of
the datasets, the Writeprints features showed the
best performance in detecting adversarial attacks.
With this feature set, an SVM classiﬁer can detect
imitation attacks with 85% accuracy and obfusca-
tion attacks with 89.5% accuracy on the Extended-
Brennan-Greenstadt dataset.

Though deception in writing style is signiﬁcantly
different from lying, both deceptions have similar
characteristics. With the Lying-detection features
we can detect imitation attacks with 75.3% accu-
racy and obfuscation attacks with 59.9% accuracy.
The 9-feature set, which can detect authorship
of regular documents with over 90% accuracy,
performed poorly (less than 50%) in detecting
adversarial attacks.

The type of machine learning method used
in classiﬁcation is another important factor in
detecting deception. The SVM classiﬁer worked
best with the Writeprints features whereas the
J48 decision tree performed well with the Lying-
detection features.

2) Which linguistic features indicate stylistic
deception?: To understand the effect of different
features, we rank the Writeprints features based
on their Information Gain Ratio (IGR) [21]. IGR
of a feature fj in class Ci is calculated using the
following formula,
IGR(Ci, fj) = (H(Ci) − H(Ci|fj))/H(fj),

where H is entropy. The top features are mostly
function words, as shown in Table VI. Other than

function words, some syntactic features such as
personal pronoun, adverbs, adjectives, and average
word length were some of the most discriminating
features.

In our dataset, the non-content-speciﬁc features
performed similar to the content-speciﬁc features
in detecting deception, as shown in Figure 1,
which suggests the possibility of generalizing these
features to detect multiple forms of adversarial
attacks.

Table VI: This table shows the features that dis-
criminate deceptive documents from regular docu-
ments. The top discriminating features are mostly
function words.

Top 20 features

Imitated documents
whats
atop
lately
wanna
underneath
anymore
beside
she
herself
beneath
like
he
till
her
onto
soon
Frequency of dot
Personal pronoun

Obfuscated documents
alot
near
up
theres
thousand
ours
shall
thats
cuz
whats
havent
Frequency of comma
lots
tons
anyway
plus
other
maybe

3) Which features do people

generally
in adversarial attacks and which
change
remain unchanged?: We analysed
features
the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt
to
understand which features people change in
stylistic deception. We
in
a feature f (Cf ) in regular and adversarial
documents using the following formula:

dataset

computed change

Cf = 100 ∗ (fadv − freg)/(freg + 1)

(1)

where, fadv and freg are the average values of
feature f in the adversarial documents and regular
documents respectively. We added 1 with freg in

468

Table V: The table shows performance of different feature sets in detecting regular and adversarial writing
samples. The Writeprints feature set with SVM classiﬁer provides the best performance in detecting
deception.

Dataset

Feature set, Classiﬁer

Writeprints, SVM

Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt

Lying-detection, J48

9-feature set, J48

Writeprints, SVM

Amazon Mechanical Turk

Lying-detection, J48

9-feature set, J48

Writeprints, SVM

Brennan-Greenstadt

Lying-detection, J48

9-feature set, J48

Type

Regular
Imitation
Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Regular
Imitation

Obfuscation

Recall
Precision
97.5% 98.5%
87.2% 82.9%
93.2% 86.1%
96.2%
95.2%
80.6%
70.7%
59.5%
60.3%
96.8%
92.3%
43.9%
52.9%
32.9%
61.9%
96.5%
98.6%
72.9%
82.3%
79.1%
96.4%
96.2%
94.2%
54.3%
71.7%
58.5%
56.7%
96.3%
92.5%
35.7%
45.5%
29.9%
45.5%
100%
94%
100%
83.3%
50%
100%
92.9%
90%
83.3%
90.9%
8.3%
11.1%
89.4%
93.7%
25%
25%
83.3%
41.7%

F-measure

98%
85%
89.5%
95.7%
75.3%
59.9%
94.5%
48%
43%
97.5%
77.3%
86.9%
95.2%
61.8%
57.6%
94.3%
40%
36%
96.9%
90.9%
66.7%
91.4%
87%
9.5%
91.5%
25%
55.6%

Overall F-measure

96.6%

92%

89%

95.6%

90.9%

88%

94.7%

85.3%

84%












$

#,

#+

#*

#)

#(

#'

#&

#%

#$

#

		

		

 	

	

	


	


	

Figure 1: Effect of different feature types in detect-
ing adversarial attacks. In each case, SVM is used
for classiﬁcation.

the denominator to avoid divide-by-zero error, as
freg can be zero for some features.

Figure 2 shows the mostly changed features
among parts-of-speech and 9-features. In Figure

469

3, we grouped similar Writeprint features together
and added their corresponding changes to show the
overall change. In each graph, the y-axis contains
a list of features that have been adjusted in the
passages and x-axis of these graphs denotes the
change in each feature.

In our experiments, participants used more exis-
tential there10 and adverbs in obfuscated passages.
We also noticed an increase in the usage of par-
ticles and personal pronouns and decrease in the
usage of noun, and Wh-pronoun. We do see hints
that authors are “dumbing down” their writing style
with shorter sentences, simpler words with less
syllables, lower readability scores and higher read-
ability ease (Figure 2). Another interesting result is
that participants used a large number of function

10Existential there (EX) is the unstressed there that triggers
inversion of the inﬂected verb and the logical subject of a
sentence [24]. For example: There/EX were lots of people in
town.

!"

	$ "


 $
!$!

"
! 

$& 
%
' !"!
% ( &
%&!
$
"%
$
!('
%* !!

+3.

+2.

+1.

+0.

.

0.

1.

2.

3. /..

Figure 2: Mostly changed features among parts-of-
speech and 9-features.

also used shorter sentences and words with less
syllables which is why the imitated passages had
less readability score (Figure 2). The personal
pronouns can likely be attributed to the direction
of the writing survey which asked participants to
describe their day in the third person. The shorter
sentences are likely a result of imitating Cormac
McCarthy who often uses short sentences in his
prose. Participants were found to use more function
words than regular in this case also, although not
as much as in the obfuscated documents.

Information Gain Ratio (IGR) and usage change
of a feature are positively correlated (shown in
Figure 5 and Figure 4). All of the highly changed
features have high IGR and unchanged features
have zero IGR. But some function words were
found to have high information gain ratio in spite
of being changed very little.




 



""






	






 










































	


	





















"'%%

"&%%

%

&%%

'%%

(%%

)%%





	












	


Figure 3: Overall changes in the Writeprint fea-
tures.

Figure 4: Relation between Information Gain Ra-
tio and absolute usage change in features in the
obfuscated documents.

words to obfuscated their writings (Figure 3). This
suggests that changing function words might be an
important way to anonymize a document. In our
dataset, the function words that were used more in
obfuscated documents than regular documents are:
I, my, there, are, you. The function words that were
used less are: as, his, by, her, be.

In imitated passages, more usage of personal
pronouns, particles and less usage of adjectives
were noticed (shown in Figure 2). Participants

470

4) Does

stylistic deception share

similar
characteristics with other deceptions?: Stylistic
deception shares similar characteristics with lying.
As shown in Table V, features used to detect lying
can detect imitation attacks with 75.3% accuracy
and obfuscation attacks with 59.9% accuracy on
the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt dataset. This
result indicates the similarity of linguistic changes
associated with any kind of information hiding.













































tool. Our classiﬁer can distinguish imitated articles
from the original writings of Ernest Hemingway
and William Faulkner with 88.6% accuracy (Table
VII).

Table VII: Imitated document prediction result:
Hemingway-Faulkner imitation corpus. (P = Pre-
cision, R= Recall and F= F-measure)











						

Figure 5: Relation between Information Gain Ra-
tio and absolute usage change in features in the
imitated documents.

some

to detect

adversarial

5) Are
attacks more
difﬁcult
than others?:
In our
experiment, obfuscation was harder
to detect
than imitation. In imitation, participants followed
one speciﬁc writing style,
the writing style of
Cormac McCarthy. Different people followed
different linguistic aspects in imitating him, for
example, some participants used short sentences,
some used descriptive adjectives and some used a
conversational format with dialogs. But the overall
writing style was limited to the style of Cormac
McCarthy. Obfuscation is different than imitation
as in obfuscation an author can choose to imitate
more than one authors’ writing style or develop a
new style different from his own. However, when
we include multiple imitated authors it becomes
correspondingly more difﬁcult to detect imitation
attacks.

6) Can we generalize deception detection?:
We check whether our deception detection ap-
proach that can detect
imitation and obfusca-
tion on the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt can de-
tect
imitation samples from the Ernest Hem-
ingway and William Faulkner imitation contests.
Our performed a 10-fold cross-validation on the
Hemingway-Faulkner imitation corpus. We used
Writeprints and Lying-detection features with SVM
and J48 classiﬁers respectively from the WEKA

471

Type

Imitation
Regular

Weighted Avg.

Lying-detection, J48
P
F

R

Writeprints, SVM
P
F

R

69.7% 69.7% 69.7% 83.8% 93.9% 88.6%
61.5% 61.5% 61.5% 92.6% 80.6% 86.2%
66.1% 66.1% 66.1% 88.1% 87.5% 87.4%

We also performed an experiment where a clas-
siﬁer trained on the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt
dataset was tested on Hemingway-Faulkner Imita-
tion corpus. Only 57.1% of the imitated documents
were considered as imitation in that case. The
Hemingway-Faulkner Imitation corpus is different
from our dataset in several ways. The participants
in the training set
imitated Cormac McCarthy
using one pre-speciﬁed excerpt from ‘The Road’
in writing about their day. But in the imitation
contests, participants imitated two different authors
without any topic constraint. Also the contest win-
ners were found to be more successful than the
mechanical turkers in imitating, as shown in Table
VIII. To see how often a classiﬁer can be fooled
into predicting imitated document as written by
the original authors, we trained an SMO SVM
classiﬁer with the Writeprints features using the
original writing excerpts of Cormac McCarthy,
Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner and tested
the classiﬁer with the imitated documents. In this
test, we classiﬁed imitated documents into three
classes: Cormac McCarthy, Ernest Hemingway,
William Faulkner. The result shows that the contest
winners can imitate Ernest Hemingway in 84.27%
cases, and William Faulkner in 66.67%, whereas
the turkers were successful in 47.05% cases in
imitating Cormac McCarthy.

C. Detecting long term deception

Detecting long term deception is similar to de-
tecting ﬁction as deception. Fiction and elaborate

Table VIII: This table shows the success rate
(Precision) of participants in imitating different
authors. Imitation contest winners were more suc-
cessful in imitating than the AMT participants.

Author name

Cormac
McCarthy
Ernest
Hemingway
William Faulkner

Imitation
success
rate
47.05%

Writer’s skill

Not professional writers

84.21%

Writing contest winners

66.67%

Writing contest winners

deception have different linguistic characteristics
than short-term on-the-spur deception, as in the
long-term deception the author has sufﬁcient time
and topic to write descriptively and edit sufﬁciently
to make it appear as a truthful document. This is
why a different approach is required to detect long-
term hoaxes and deception. Regular authorship
recognition can be helpful to ﬁnd inconsistencies
in writing and to discover real authorship of the
deceptive documents.

To test our method on long-term deception,
we used the Thomas-Amina Hoax corpus. We
performed an authorship attribution test on the
posts he created as himself and as Amina in the
alternate-history Yahoo! group. We found that he
consistently maintained a separate writing style as
Amina in the Yahoo! group as none of the Amina’s
posts were attributed to Thomas in the authorship
attribution test. Thomas’s writing style as Amina
was different than his regular writing style. The
use of upper-case letters and modal verbs 11 were
noticeable in Amina’s posts, whereas Thomas used
longer sentences and more adjective and adverbs.
Table IX lists the top Writeprints features that
discriminate Thomas and Amina’s posts in the
Yahoo! group.

Moreover, all of the posts Thomas wrote as
Amina and as himself and posts of Britta were
considered as regular when tested on an SVM
classiﬁer which was trained with the Extended-
Brennan-Greenstadt corpus. Deception classiﬁca-

11Modal verbs are verbs that do not take an -s ending in the
third person singular present, i.e. can, could, may, might, ought.

Table IX: Features that discriminate Thomas and
Amina.

Feature
Percent upper case
t
than
all
only
tha
though
Frequency of *
less
can
not
a
that
Modal verb
that
them
even
doing

Information Gain Ratio
0.758
0.620
0.620
0.516
0.516
0.501
0.501
0.432
0.433
0.433
0.433
0.423
0.423
0.423
0.423
0.373
0.372
0.361

tion of the posts from “A Gay Girl in Damascus”
also did not show any indication of masking. In
our test, only 14% of the blog posts were con-
sidered as deceptive which is less than the error
rate, suggesting a random effect. 13 blog posts
were classiﬁed as obfuscated documents, 22 were
classiﬁed as imitated document. Table X shows that
57.14% of the deceptive documents were attributed
to Amina during authorship attribution.

Table X: Blog post classiﬁcation.

Imitation
Obfuscation

Thomas

11
4

Amina

11
9

But maintaining an alternate writing style con-
sistently for a long time is hard, which was evident
in the Thomas-Amina case. When people started
questioning Amina’s existence, Thomas and his
wife Britta were suspected as possible writers of
the blog based on various pieces of evidence, for
example, Thomas’s address was used in Amina’s
account, and photos from Britta’s picasa album
were used in Amina’s blog. In the end, Thomas
admitted that he was “Amina.” Regular authorship
recognition also supports this fact. More than half
of the blog posts (54.03%) were attributed to

472

Thomas during authorship attribution with an SVM
classiﬁer and the Writeprints feature set. Only 10
posts were attributed to Britta and the rest were
attributed to “Amina.” Native language detection,
age and other demographics analysis are other
possible ways to detect this form of deception,
which are not explored in this paper.

VII. DISCUSSION

In this research, we showed that two kinds of
adversarial attacks—imitation and obfuscation—
can be detected with high accuracy using a large
feature set. However, the results of cross-validation
on the Extended-Brennan-Greenstadt corpus are
considerably better than the results on the imitation
contest participants (96.6% vs. 87.4%).

There are several potential explanations for this
discrepancy. The ﬁrst is that the original dataset
only handles a single imitated author, Cormac Mc-
Carthy, and the imitation classiﬁer may be overﬁt
to detect
imitations of his style. This suggests
that training on a combination of different author
imitations will produce a stronger general classiﬁer
and that an imitation classiﬁer should be trained on
the target of the attack, if known.

The second potential explanation is the skill
and incentive differential between the AMT par-
ticipants and the contest winners. We included
all reasonable attempts by the mechanical
turk
participants, but only the top three contestants per
year were included in the contest data set. We
offered our participants $5. A Faulker contest win-
ner receives airfare for two to Memphis on United
Airlines, ﬁve days free car rental, two free passes
to the Faulkner Conference, and a complimentary
room for ﬁve days and nights at an Oxford motel.
First prize in the Heminway contest was round-trip
tickets and dinner for two at Harry’s in Florence,
Italy.

A third potential explanation is that part of the
success on the original data set is due to topic
detection, not deception detection. In the Extended-
Brennan-Greenstadt corpus, regular documents are
from a variety of documents, obfuscation docu-
ments are a description of a neighborhood, and im-
itation documents provide a third-person narrative

of a day.

Our analysis of the feature set shows that the
non-content speciﬁc features have the same accu-
racy as of the content-speciﬁc features (Figure 1).
Also, as most top ranked discriminating features
are function words, even by ignoring contextual
similarity of the documents, it is possible to detect
adversarial documents with sufﬁcient accuracy.

While it is true that content features may in-
dicate authorship or deception, we do not believe
this is the case here. Our non-deceptive writing
samples consist of multiple documents per author,
yet our authorship recognition techniques identify
them properly with high levels of accuracy. The
different content features there did not dissuade
the standard authorship recognition techniques and
we do not believe they greatly alter the outcome
of the deception analysis. Furthermore, previous
linguistic research has shown that the frequencies
of common function words are content neutral and
indicative of personal writing style [15].

What the “Gay Girl in Damascus” results show
is that obfuscation is difﬁcult to maintain in the
long term. While Tom’s posts as Amina were not
found to be deceptive by our classiﬁer, we show
that
traditional authorship attribution techniques
work in this case.

Implications for Future Analyses: The current
state of the art seems to provide a perfect balance
between privacy and security. Authors who are
deceptive in their writing style are difﬁcult
to
identify, however their deception itself is often
detectable. Further, the detection approach works
best in cases where the author is trying fraudulently
present themselves as another author.

However, while we are currently unable to un-
mask the original author of short term deceptions,
further analyses might be able to do so, especially
once a deception classiﬁer is able to partition the
sets. On the other hand, the Extended-Brennan-
Greenstadt data set used contains basic attacks by
individuals relying solely on intuition (they have
no formal training or background in authorship
attribution) and the results on the more skilled
contest winners are less extensive.

We are currently working on a software appli-

473

cation to facilitate stylometry experiments and aid
users in hiding their writing style. The software
will point out features that are identifying to users
and thus provide a mechanism for performing
adaptive countermeasures against stylometry. This
tool may be useful for those who need longer
term anonymity or authors who need to maintain
a consistent narrative voice. Even though Thomas
MacMaster proved extremely skilled in hiding his
writing style, half his posts were still identiﬁable
as him rather than the ﬁctional Amina.

In addition, these adaptive attacks may be able to
hide the features that indicate deception, especially
those in our top 20. It is also possible that attempts
to change these features will result in changes that
are still indicative of deception, particularly in the
case of imitations. The fact is that most people
do not have enough command of language to
convincingly imitate the great masters of literature
and the differences in style should be detectable
using an appropriate feature set. A broader set
of imitated authors is needed to determine which
authors are easier or harder to imitate. Despite our
ability to communicate, language is learned on an
individual basis resulting in an individual writing
style [11].

Implications for Adversarial Learning: Ma-
chine learning is often used in security problems
from spam detection, to intrusion detection, to mal-
ware analysis. In these situations, the adversarial
nature of the problem means that the adversary can
often manipulate the classiﬁer to produce lower
quality or sometimes entirely ineffective results.
In the case of adversarial writing, we show that
using a broader feature set causes the manipulation
itself to be detectable. This approach may be useful
in other areas of adversarial learning to increase
accuracy by screening out adversarial inputs.

VIII. CONCLUSION

authorship has been obfuscated, the obfuscation
itself is detectable using a large feature set that
is content-independent. Using Information Gain
Ratio, we show that the most effective features for
detecting deceptive writing are function words. We
analyze a long-term deception and show that reg-
ular authorship recognition is more effective than
deception detection to ﬁnd indication of stylistic
deception in this case.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We are thankful to the Intel Science and Tech-
nology Center (ISTC) for Secure Computing and
DARPA (grant N10AP20014) for supporting this
work. We also thank Ahmed Abbasi for clarifying
the Writeprints feature set and our colleagues Aylin
Caliskan, Andrew McDonald, Ariel Stolerman and
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments
on the paper.

REFERENCES

[1] Ahmed Abbasi and Hsinchun Chen. Writeprints: A
stylometric approach to identity-level identiﬁcation
and similarity detection in cyberspace. ACM Trans.
Inf. Syst., 26(2):1–29, 2008.

[2] M. Brennan and R. Greenstadt. Practical attacks
against authorship recognition techniques. In Pro-
ceedings of the Twenty-First Conference on Inno-
vative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IAAI),
Pasadena, CA, 2009.

[3] J. Burgoon, J. Blair, T. Qin, and J. Nunamaker.
Detecting deception through linguistic analysis.
Intelligence and Security Informatics, pages 958–
958, 2010.

[4] K Calix, M Connors, D Levy, H Manzar, G MCabe,
and S Westcott.
Stylometry for e-mail author
identiﬁcation and authentication. Proceedings of
CSIS Research Day, Pace University, 2008.

Stylometry is necessary to determine authentic-
ity of a document to prevent deception, hoaxes and
frauds. In this work, we show that manual counter-
measures against stylometry can be detected using
second-order effects. That is, while it may be im-
possible to detect the author of a document whose

[5] Carole E. Chaski. Who’s at the keyboard: Author-
ship attribution in digital evidence investigations.
In 8th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguis-
tics/Language and Law, 2005.

[6] M.G. Frank, M.A. Menasco, and M. O’Sullivan.

Human Behavior and Deception Detection.

474

[7] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer,
P. Reutemann, and I.H. Witten. The weka data
mining software: an update. ACM SIGKDD Explo-
rations Newsletter, 11(1):10–18, 2009.

[18] Michael P. Oakes. Ant colony optimisation for sty-
lometry: The federalist papers. Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Recent Advances
in Soft Computing, pages 86–91, 2004.

[8] J.T. Hancock, L.E. Curry, S. Goorha, and M. Wood-
worth. On lying and being lied to: A linguis-
tic analysis of deception in computer-mediated
communication. Discourse Processes, 45(1):1–23,
2008.

[9] D.I. Holmes and R.S. Forsyth.

The federalist
revisited: New directions in authorship attribution.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 10:111–127,
1995.

[10] P. Juola and D. Vescovi. Empirical evaluation of
authorship obfuscation using JGAAP. In Proceed-
ings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence and Security, pages 14–18. ACM, 2010.

[11] Patrick Juola. Authorship attribution. Foundations
and Trends in information Retrieval, 1(3):233–334,
2008.

[12] Gary Kacmarcik and Michael Gamon. Obfus-
cating document stylometry to preserve author
anonymity.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL
on Main conference poster sessions, pages 444–
451, Morristown, NJ, USA, 2006. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

[13] Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Schler, Shlomo Argamon,
and Eran Messeri. Authorship attribution with
thousands of candidate authors. In Proceedings of
the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on Research and development in information
retrieval, SIGIR ’06, pages 659–660, New York,
NY, USA, 2006. ACM.

[14] M.B. Malyutov.

Information transfer and com-
binatories. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
4123(3), 2006.

[19] J.W. Pennebaker, R.J. Booth, and M.E. Francis.
Linguistic inquiry and word count (LIWC2007).
Austin, TX: LIWC (www. liwc. net), 2007.

[20] J.C. Platt. Sequential minimal optimization: A fast
algorithm for training support vector machines. Ad-
vances in Kernel MethodsSupport Vector Learning,
208(MSR-TR-98-14):1–21, 1998.

[21] J.R. Quinlan. Induction of decision trees. Machine

learning, 1(1):81–106, 1986.

[22] J.R. Quinlan. C4. 5: programs for machine learn-

ing. Morgan kaufmann, 1993.

[23] Josyula R. Rao and Pankaj Rohatgi.

Can
pseudonymity really guarantee privacy?
In
SSYM’00: Proceedings of the 9th conference on
USENIX Security Symposium, Berkeley, CA, USA,
2000. USENIX Association.

[24] B. Santorini. Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for

the Penn Treebank Project (3rd revision). 1990.

[25] Harold Somers and Fiona Tweedie. Authorship
attribution and pastiche. Computers and the Hu-
manities, 37:407–429, 2003.

[26] M. Steller and JC Yuille. Recent developments in
statement analysis. Credibility assessment, pages
135–154, 1989.

[27] Fiona J. Tweedie, S. Singh, and D.I. Holmes.
Neural network applications in stylometry: The
federalist papers. Computers and the Humanities,
30(1):1–10, 1996.
¨Uzlem Uzuner and Boris Katz. A comparative
study of language models for book and author
recognition. In IJCNLP, page 969, 2005.

[28]

[15] F. Mosteller and D. Wallace.

Inference and dis-

puted authorship: The federalist. 1964.

[16] Mihir Nanavati, Nathan Taylor, William Aiello, and
Andrew Warﬁeld. Herbert westdeanonymizer.
In
6th Usenix Workshop on Hot Topics in Security
(HotSec), 2011.

[17] A. Narayanan, H. Paskov, N. Gong, J. Bethencourt,
E. Stefanov, R. Shin, and D. Song. On the
feasibility of internet-scale author identiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the 33rd conference on IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE, 2012.

[29] James Wayman, Nicholas Orlans, Qian Hu,
and Valorie
Fred Goodman, Azar Ulrich,
Valencia.
the
state of the art biometrics excellence roadmap.
http://www.biometriccoe.gov/SABER/index.htm,
March 2009.

Technology assessment

for

[30] R. Zheng, J. Li, H. Chen, and Z. Huang. A
framework of authorship identiﬁcation for online
messages: Writing style features and classiﬁcation
techniques. Journal American Society for Informa-
tion Science and Technology, 57(3):378–393, 2006.

475

