2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

Cloak and Swagger: Understanding Data Sensitivity

Through the Lens of User Anonymity
Sai Teja Peddinti∗, Aleksandra Korolova†, Elie Bursztein†, and Geetanjali Sampemane†

∗Polytechnic School of Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY 11201

†Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043

Email: psaiteja@nyu.edu

Email: korolova, elieb, geta@google.com

Abstract—Most of what we understand about data sensitivity
is through user self-report (e.g., surveys); this paper is the ﬁrst to
use behavioral data to determine content sensitivity, via the clues
that users give as to what information they consider private or
sensitive through their use of privacy enhancing product features.
We perform a large-scale analysis of user anonymity choices
during their activity on Quora, a popular question-and-answer
site. We identify categories of questions for which users are more
likely to exercise anonymity and explore several machine learning
approaches towards predicting whether a particular answer will
be written anonymously. Our ﬁndings validate the viability of
the proposed approach towards an automatic assessment of data
sensitivity, show that data sensitivity is a nuanced measure that
should be viewed on a continuum rather than as a binary concept,
and advance the idea that machine learning over behavioral data
can be effectively used in order to develop product features that
can help keep users safe.

I. INTRODUCTION

As the world moves to an ever-connected paradigm, online
interactions are increasingly shaping how we interact with
others and are perceived by them. The rise of services such
as Facebook, Twitter, Google+, and YouTube that empower
individuals to share their thoughts and experiences instantly and
easily have opened the ﬂood gates of user-generated content.
This content deeply inﬂuences many aspects of our culture:
from the creation of new dance styles [1] to the way breaking
news are reported [2], to the rise of self-published authors [3].
A risk of this always-on sharing culture is that it may push
users to share or express things that can harm them. The web is
full of stories of careless or mistaken sharing of information or
opinions that led to embarrassment or harm, from getting ﬁred
because of ranting about job frustrations [4] to public relations
catastrophes due to “tweeting” under the inﬂuence [5].

The approach taken by online services to address this
challenge to date has taken two directions: the ﬁrst one deﬁnes
what content users may consider sensitive and attempts to
prevent its sharing without explicit conﬁrmation. The second
one introduces granular privacy controls in order to empower
users to choose the desired privacy settings for each item they
share. Both face scalability issues. Hand-crafted or survey-
based deﬁnitions of sensitivity can hardly keep up with
differences in preferences and expectations due to the context
in which they are being applied or due to cultural, geographic,
and demographic factors [6]. The second approach may be
overwhelming due to diversity of privacy choices available.

© 2014, Sai Teja Peddinti. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP.2014.38

493

In this work we explore whether it is possible to perform
a large-scale behavioral data analysis, rather than to rely on
surveys and self-report, in order to understand what topics
users consider sensitive. Our goal is to help online service
providers design policies and develop product features that
promote user engagement and safer sharing and increase users’
trust in online services’ privacy practices.

Concretely, we perform analysis and data mining of the
usage of privacy features on one of the largest question-and-
answer sites, Quora [7], in order to identify topics potentially
considered sensitive by its users. The analysis takes advantage
of the Quora privacy feature that allows users to choose whether
to answer each question anonymously or with their names
attached. To learn what topics are potentially sensitive for Quora
users, we analyze 587,653 Quora questions and 1,223,624
answers that span over 61,745 topics and 27,697 contexts. We
ﬁnd evidence in support of sensitivity of the oft-cited topics,
such as those related to race, religion, sex, drugs, and sexual
orientation [8], [9], [10], [11], and discover topic groups that
are not typically included in such lists, many of them related
to emotions, relationships, personal experiences, education,
career, and insider knowledge. We use the obtained knowledge
to build a machine learning model that is able to predict
the sensitivity of particular questions with 80.4% accuracy
and anonymity of answers with 88% accuracy, demonstrating
that data on users’ use of privacy-enhancing features can be
used to develop policies and product features that enable safer
sharing. Finally, we run a 1,500 person user survey on the US
population via Google Consumer surveys [12] and compare
our user activity-driven inferences with those obtained via a
self-report. As far as we know, we are the ﬁrst to use large-
scale data analysis of users’ privacy-related activity in order to
infer content sensitivity and leverage the data towards building
a machine learning model designed to help service providers
design better privacy controls and foster engagement without
a fear of over-sharing.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in
Section II we review the current approaches towards deﬁning
content sensitivity and concerns related to data sharing. In
Section III we introduce Quora and its features, and describe
the dataset we collected based on it. In Sections IV and V we
present and discuss the results of our data analyses based on
users’ usage of Quora’s anonymity features in terms of topics

and words indicative of sensitivity. In Section VI we present
the results of our attempts to predict question-level and answer-
level anonymity based on their content. Section VII discusses
limitations of our approach and the challenges of relying on
a purely data-driven analysis for identifying sensitivity, and
presents a comparison of our ﬁndings with those based on an
online survey. Section VIII describes related work on inferring
users’ privacy preferences, privacy risks, and efforts related to
helping users minimize regret from sharing. We conclude by
summarizing our contributions in Section IX.

II. BACKGROUND

In this section we discuss the notions of content sensitivity
adopted by several popular online services and data protection
authorities, the potential negative consequences of over-sharing,
and the positive impact that product features cognizant of data
sensitivity can have on engagement with a product.

A. What is Sensitive Content?

There is no universally adopted deﬁnition of what constitutes
sensitive content. Each online service provider deﬁnes sensitive
data independently, describes it in the service’s privacy policy or
Terms of Service, and then develops functionalities or policies
to observe this deﬁnition. For example, Google’s privacy policy
deﬁnes sensitive personal information as “conﬁdential medical
facts, racial or ethnic origins, political or religious beliefs
or sexuality” [8] and Google does not associate cookies or
anonymous identiﬁers with sensitive advertising categories as
“those based on race, religion, sexual orientation or health”
[13]. Facebook’s advertising guidelines prohibit targeting users
based on their personal characteristics from the categories of
“race or ethnic origin; religion or philosophical belief; age;
sexual orientation or sexual life; gender identity; disability
or medical condition (including physical or mental health);
ﬁnancial status or information; membership in a trade union;
and criminal record” [10]. Similarly, Microsoft’s advertising
policy states that ads cannot be related to prohibited and
restricted categories such as adult content, ﬁrearms and
weapons, gambling, surveillance equipment, suffering, violence
and exploitation, dating/personals, health, political and religious
content, etc. [9]. Quora considers adult content to be sensitive,
as evidenced by their decision to disable the views feature
(Section III) on questions related to that type of content [14].
Legal and data protection authorities have also proposed
deﬁnition of sensitive content that is similar but not identical
to those of online service providers. For example, CNIL [15],
the French administrative regulatory body whose mission is
focused on data privacy, deﬁnes sensitive data as “any type
of data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions,
religious or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, or
data concerning health or sex life” [11]. A directive of the
European Parliament delineates special categories of data for
whom stricter processing laws apply and includes in it: racial
or ethnic origins, views on politics, labour relations or religion,
health, sex life, penalties, convictions and national ID [16].

User perceptions of content sensitivity may differ from the
categories deﬁned by online services and policy makers. Privacy
experts call for deﬁnitions that would allow the concept of
sensitive data to “evolve over time and [depend] on the context,
technologies, the use made of the data and even the individuals
themselves”, highlighting that most current deﬁnitions are
restricted to “data that may give rise to discrimination”,
and that “even trivial data can become sensitive owing to
the way it accumulates on the internet and the way in
is processed” [6]. The goal of this work is to
which it
deepen our understanding and capture the nuances of users’
content sensitivity perception through a data-driven study of
users’ privacy-related actions. The data-driven approach could
complement that based on user surveys and serve as a more
scalable way to understand the evolution and differences in
perception over time and across cultures.

B. Dangers of Over-Sharing

Social networks such as Facebook and Google+ offer controls
to limit the visibility of one’s posts to a speciﬁc user group.
However, users often make mistakes when posting or sharing
information that can lead to trouble. For example, sharing
location information on Twitter facilitated a successful bur-
glary [17], and inadvertent exposure of sexuality on Facebook
resulted in threats to sever family ties [18]. Mistakes or
unforeseen consequences of sharing can also cause discomfort
or embarrassment [19] and there’s ample evidence that users
often regret their online postings [20].

Furthermore, data shared online has become one of the
most-often checked sources of information about a person. For
example, colleges routinely assess the social network proﬁles
of their applicants [21], employers look at potential candidates’
online proﬁles [22], and people of both genders research their
potential dates online [23]. Thus the potential consequences
of sharing mistakes (due to lack of understanding of sharing
impact, inattentiveness, lack of privacy controls, or spur-of-the-
moment decisions) are constantly increasing, which is starting
to cause fear of engaging, sharing, or expressing one’s opinion
online [24], [25].

C. Impact of Better Privacy Tools and Features

On the other hand, development of many privacy-enhancing
technologies and product features has enabled many people
to engage and share online with more conﬁdence and less
risk [26], [27], [28], [29]. Recently, smart privacy features
have become one of the core enablers of success for social
networks and sharing services [30], [31].

In particular, though anonymity as a feature can reduce
accountability and accuracy of information shared [32], it often
enables people to be more open about their views [33], increases
the effectiveness of leadership and group transactions [34], and
enables user engagement [35].

Overall, a better understanding of user privacy fears and
sensitivity of the content shared, would enable many online
service providers to improve their products and engagement
with their products. A feature on Facebook, LinkedIn, or

494

Google+ that double-checks the user’s intention to share
a drunken rant publicly or with their work colleagues, or
alerts them that a post would likely make others aware of
their religious or sexual preference, could help avoid sharing
mistakes and build user conﬁdence in sharing and engaging
online. A feature that double-checks the intention to share
a sensitive piece of information, with sensitivity evaluated
from a user’s perspective rather than a legal or one-size-ﬁts-all
perspective, would be even more impactful.

III. QUORA

We use Quora [7], a popular question-and-answer site, in
order to perform our proof-of-concept data-driven analysis of
user perceptions of content sensitivity. Quora is a particularly
fertile data source for such an analysis since it has a rich and
prominent set of privacy features actively utilized by its user
base when sharing about or expressing interest in a particular
topic. We describe Quora functionality, its core privacy features,
incentives for sharing anonymously or non-anonymously, and
the characteristics of Quora as a study dataset next.

A. About Quora

Quora [7] is a question-and-answer website founded in 2009,
somewhat similar to the once-popular Yahoo! Answers [36]. It
has functionality that enables users to ask and answer questions
on a variety of topics, as well as to “follow” or subscribe to
updates on activity by other users or activity by all users related
to a particular topic.

An example Quora page is shown in Figure 1, with several
core features, present in each question page, highlighted. Every
Quora Question page has three main information blocks that we
are interested in – Question, Answer and Follower blocks. The
Question Block has ﬁve pieces of information. It has two sets
of tags (Quora Context and Quora Topics), the actual question
text, additional question details and comments. Quora Context
and Quora Topics are highlighted by a (violet) rectangular box
at the top of Figure 1. Each question is assigned at most one
context and zero or more topics by Quora moderators. Users
can choose to follow individual topics or questions, in which
case they receive notiﬁcations about new activity related to
them and their follow choice gets shared with other users.

Each question has zero or more answers. Each answer has
four pieces of information – the answerer details, a partial
list of voters (who upvoted the answer), the answer text
and comments. The answerer ﬁeld contains the name of the
person who answered and a short description of the person
(highlighted by green box in Figure 1). If the answerer prefers
to answer anonymously, she can use the Make Anonymous
option available above the answer text box (highlighted by a
red box in Figure 1). When the Make Anonymous option is
exercised, others see Anonymous instead of the name in the
answerer ﬁeld (as highlighted by the red box in Figure 1).

Every question has zero or more followers, who are interested
in the question and would like to be notiﬁed about new
answers being posted. A partial grid of followers (indicated by
their pictures) is provided at the bottom right of the question

webpage (highlighted in an orange rectangular box in Figure 1).
Only a max of 45 pictures are shown, even when the number of
followers is much higher for a question. Similar to the option
to answer anonymously, Quora provides an option to follow a
question anonymously. The anonymous question followers are
indicated by grey icons in the follower grid (as highlighted by
the last icon in the followers list in Figure 1).

For every question, Quora also keeps track of the number of
Quora users who viewed the question. The number of views is
shown to all users above the grid of followers (as highlighted
by a violet rectangular box at the bottom right in Figure 1).
Clicking on that number provides the list of Quora users who
viewed this particular Quora question.

B. Quora Privacy Features

Although Quora has a strict real-names policy [37], similar
to that of other online social networks such as Facebook and
Google+, it provides several privacy-related product features
that are core to its functionality and are heavily utilized by its
users [38]. Speciﬁcally, each user can choose whether to follow
a question anonymously or non-anonymously, and whether to
write an answer anonymously or non-anonymously by using the
Make Anonymous feature. Users are also provided an option to
hide their question views, so they are not listed in the user group
who viewed a particular question (however the shown view
count includes all page visits). Furthermore, Quora provides
protection to its users against crawlers using a feature called
Search Engine Privacy [39]. The default option is to Allow
search engines to index the name. If indexing is disallowed by
a user, Quora prevents crawlers, search engines, and other not-
logged in users from seeing that user’s proﬁle page information,
his activity and, renders any activity performed by that user to
be indistinguishable from anonymous user activity for anyone
except other logged in users.

C. Incentives for Anonymity and Non-Anonymity

Quora users describe several motivations for following and
answering questions anonymously [40]. Some users prefer not
to identify themselves in their answers when they relate to
personal experiences, or experiences of friends and family
members, or contain information about sensitive topics such
as medical history. Others answer anonymously to avoid em-
barrassing or unfavorable situations that their answer can lead
to [21], [22], [23], or to avoid trouble when sharing potentially
sensitive or conﬁdential information about companies about
which they have insider knowledge. Others, who are striving
to build a reputation in a certain domain, prefer to answer
anonymously and reveal their identity later if the answer gains
recognition or popularity, as indicated by up-votes, another
Quora feature. Finally, since Quora is akin to a social network
where people follow others, answering anonymously prevents
the answer from appearing in followers’ feeds.

There are several strong incentives for answering questions
with one’s real name, as pointed out in [41]. Providing one’s
identity along with an answer may lend it credibility [32],
as readers can verify the provided information with the help

495

Fig. 1. Sample Quora Webpage with Interesting Components Highlighted

of details provided in the answerer’s proﬁle. Non-anonymous
answers help build reputation, popularity, and social capital. It
also helps build new connections, and it is revealed that people
are using votes as social signals to draw attention of inﬂuential
people.

Irrespective of an individual’s reasons for answering anony-
mously or non-anonymously, one can argue that it is better
for the Quora eco-system if many answers are provided
non-anonymously. Such answers promote user interaction
and engagement, as non-anonymous answers appear in the
answerer’s followers feeds. Since users may take more care
when answering non-anonymously as they want to appear
knowledgeable, the quality of such content increases. Hence,
enabling users to share non-anonymously while avoiding
undesirable situations would be a desirable outcome for Quora.

D. Dataset Characteristics

We crawled the Quora website using our own custom crawler
during the period of August - October, 2012. We follow a
similar approach as outlined in [42] for crawling Quora. Our
crawler observed the Quora’s robots.txt as well as rate-limited
our access. Furthermore, in order to limit the request load,
we only crawled the Quora question pages, and omitted all

other pages, such as answer pages, follower pages, activity
pages, views pages, and user proﬁle pages. As a result, the
information we obtained about question followers is limited to
the followers listed at the bottom right of the Quora question
page (Figure 1), and does not include all question followers.
The question pages list up to 45 followers, and our manual
inspection suggests those are chosen at random (with caching).
Furthermore, we have observed that the answers of users who
have enabled the “Search Engine Privacy” feature on Quora
appear as “Anonymous” to non logged-in users, regardless of
whether that answer was written anonymously or not [39]. Since
our crawler did not possess the credentials of a logged in Quora
user, our dataset does not distinguish between answers that were
written anonymously and those that were labeled by Quora as
“Anonymous” due to users’ “Search Engine Privacy” settings,
which is an important limitation. We discuss the implications
of these crawl limitations in Sections IV-B2 and VII-A.

Our obtained dataset contains 587,653 Quora questions.
Of these, 437,622 (74.47%) have at least one answer, and
563,954 (95.97%) have at least one follower. The number of
Quora questions containing at least one anonymous answer
is 138,576 (23.58%), while number of questions with at least
one anonymous follower is 336,551 (57.27%). Since the effort

496

such as sex, religion, etc., but also suggest themes outside of
the typical set as potentially sensitive. In addition to identifying
topics that are considered potentially sensitive by Quora users,
our ﬁndings lend support to the feasibility of our proposed
approach – identifying user sensitivities and privacy preferences
via behavioral data analysis of users’ use of privacy-enhancing
product features.

A. Measuring Context-level and Topic-level Anonymity Ratios
In our ﬁrst methodology, we measure a topic’s sensitivity
level by considering all questions belonging to the topic and
computing the fraction of answers to those questions that
are anonymous among the total number of answers posted
for those questions. We perform this analysis separately for
Quora topics and Quora contexts. We choose to use the Quora-
assigned topics and contexts, rather than classify the questions
and answers into our own topic hierarchy, because Quora’s
human moderators have spent signiﬁcant effort in order to
hand-label each of the questions with a corresponding context
or set of topics, and thus we expect their label quality to be
higher than what can be derived based on a short snippet via
unsupervised machine learning techniques. We exclude topics
and contexts for which we do not have sufﬁcient data from
consideration in order to avoid making erroneous conclusions.
We also exclude questions that did not receive a single answer
from consideration in all our analyses, as they do not provide
information about the anonymity/non-anonymity user choices
that are of interest for this research.

1) Context Data: There are 21,232 contexts on Quora that
have at least 1 question with at least 1 answer and at least 1
follower3. The average number of questions per context among
these is 10.85, so we consider only the most popular contexts,
i.e., those that have at least 11 questions, in our analysis. The
3,129 contexts with at least 11 questions belonging to them
contain 188,121 questions with a total of 512,225 answers,
86,213 of which are anonymous, suggesting a 0.17 overall
anonymity rate. We further limit our analysis to the 1,525
contexts that, in addition to being comprised of at least 11
questions each, contain at least 66 answers. The motivation
for choosing contexts with at least 6 answers per question on
average stems from the desire to focus on contexts that have
generated sufﬁcient engagement. Additionally, a question with
6 answers one of which is anonymous, has an anonymity rate of
0.17, which is the overall average anonymity rate for contexts
with 11 questions; furthermore, a question with 6 answers two
of which are anonymous, would have an anonymity rate of
more than twice the average, enabling even the discrete answer
counts to distinguish between average and above average [43].
These 1,525 contexts have a total of 159,884 questions with
452,221 answers, 76,947 of which are anonymous.

For each context C of the 1,525 contexts that contain at least
11 questions and at least 66 answers, we compute its answer
anonymity ratio, A(C), as the fraction of anonymous answers

3A large number of questions, 256,270, are not labeled with any context

and are, therefore, excluded from this part of the analysis.

497

Fig. 2. Quora Anonymous and All Answers Distribution

Fig. 3. Quora Anonymous and All Followers Distribution

required to answer a question is signiﬁcantly higher than the
effort required to follow a question, and, furthermore, answering
a question requires some knowledge about the question’s
topic, whereas following a question is merely an expression
of curiosity or interest about it and its potential answers, it is
not surprising that there are more questions with at least one
follower than with at least one answer.

The distribution of the number of answers and anonymous
answers for questions in our dataset is shown in Figure 2; the
x-axis shows the number of answers or anonymous answers and
the y-axis – the number of questions with that many answers
(in log scale). The ﬁgure omits a handful of questions that have
more than 100 answers for readability. The question with the
most answers and the most anonymous answers in our dataset
“What is the most useful, shortest, and generally applicable
piece of wisdom?”1 has 440 answers, 73 of them anonymous.
The distribution of the number of followers for the questions
in our collected dataset is shown in Figure 3; the x-axis shows
the number of followers or anonymous followers and the y-axis
– the number of questions with that many followers2.

IV. SENSITIVE CONTEXTS AND TOPICS

In this section, we present two methodologies for identifying
which contexts and topics may be more sensitive than others
based on Quora user anonymity actions. Both approaches give
support for sensitivity of topics typically considered sensitive,

1http://www.quora.com/Advice/What-is-the-most-useful-shortest-and-

most-generally-applicable-piece-of-wisdom

2We use overlapped rather than stacked bars in Figures 2 and 3 for ease of

comparison.

Sex, Penises, Political Thinking (1986 book), Indian Muslims, Attractive-
ness and Attractive People, Cheating (relationship and marital inﬁdelity),
Anonymity on Quora, Patent Law, Greece, Palantir Technologies, Pick-
Up Artists, Prostitution, Interracial Dating and Relationships, Intellectual
Property, Pornography, Sexism, Secrets, Bipolar Disorder, Patents, Asian
Americans, California Institute of Technology, Hacking (computer secu-
rity), Abortion, Bridge (card game), OkCupid, Topics (Quora feature),
Women, Racism, Recipes, Boards (Quora feature), Investment Banking,
Ethnic and Cultural Differences, LGBTQ Issues, Baby Names, Square, Inc.,
British-American Differences, Judaism, Depression, The Ivy League, Views
on Quora (feature), Salaries, What Does It Feel Like to X?, Race and
Ethnicity, Humor on Quora, Harvard College, Interpersonal Interaction,
Friendship, Hard Disk Drives (HDD), Taxes, Gender Differences, Dating
and Relationships, American Express, Menlo Park, CA, Men, Table Tennis,
Airlines, Mitt Romney’s Taxes and Related Debate (Summer 2012),
Higgs Boson, Joke Question, Indian People, Middle East, Feminism, Asian
People, Cannabis, Hackers, LGBTQ, Civil Engineering, Armchair Philosophy,
Dating Advice, God, Trolling on the Internet, IQ, Suicide, Same Sex
Marriage, Management Consulting and Management Consulting Firms,
Quora Etiquette, Sparrow (mail app), Quora Moderation, Foreign Policy,
Social Advice, Self-Defense, Rush Limbaugh, Christianity, Quora Promote
Feature, Harry Potter Book 7 Deathly Hallows (2007 book), Expressions
(language), Breakups, Trains (transportation service), Names and Naming,
Downtown Palo Alto, Quora (product), Iranian Nuclear Threat and Potential
Israeli Attack, Homosexuality, German (language), Jewish People, Flying,
Wealthy People and Families, Zynga, Product Naming, Air Travel

Fig. 4. Top 100 Contexts by Anonymity Ratio. In italics – those that belong
to themes already considered sensitive by Facebook, Google and CNIL; in
bold – those that do not, according to manual categorization by hired workers.

received to questions within that context to the total number of
answers received to questions within that context. Similarly, we
compute its follower anonymity ratio, F (C), as the fraction of
anonymous followers among the total number of followers. We
observe that: mean
= 0.044. Furthermore,
mean
answer anonymity ratios and follower anonymity ratios are
highly correlated, corr(A, F ) = 0.84.

(cid:2)
= 0.165, stdev

= 0.172, stdev

(cid:2)
F (C)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
F (C)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
A(C)

(cid:3)

= 0.078;

A(C)

(cid:3)

2) Context-Based Results: Our ﬁndings are presented in
Table I and Figure 4. The former presents statistics for those
14 contexts whose answer anonymity ratio, A(C), is three
standard deviations above the mean, while the latter lists the
top 100 Quora contexts in the decreasing order of their A(C)s.
We manually analyze each of the 243 contexts whose answer
anonymity ratio exceeds one standard deviation above the
average. For each context we attempt to assess whether it
belongs to one of the typically considered sensitive categories,
and if not, identify its broader theme. We do so by hiring 5
workers4 and tasking them with labeling each context with
one or two of the most appropriate 41 themes we provide
(or “None”). The themes we provide are comprised of the
top-level content themes utilized by Google AdWords5 and
the categories typically considered sensitive as described in

4Workers hired and paid using the outsourcing service Premier [44].
5https://support.google.com/adwords/answer/156178?ctx=tltp

498

Section II-A.

Several observations based on this analysis strike us as
noteworthy. First, the majority of sensitive categories described
by Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and CNIL, such as racial or
ethnic origins; political, philosophical, or religious beliefs;
sexual orientation or sex life; gender identity; disability
or medical condition (including physical or mental health);
ﬁnancial status or information; dating/personals; weapons,
have supporting evidence among the selected Quora contexts.
For example, supporting evidence for the sensitivity of ﬁnancial
information are contexts such as Salaries, Taxes, Investment
Banking and American Express. The only exception for which
we did not ﬁnd supporting evidence among the ones used by
these four entities is: criminal record. The absence of evidence
in favor of this is likely due to selection biases among Quora
users and questions.

Second, as is visually clear from Figure 4, which distin-
guishes the contexts that belong to typically considered sensitive
categories (as judged by at least two workers) from those that do
not, although several of the contexts with the highest anonymity
ratio belong to the categories of data typically considered
sensitive, many do not. Speciﬁcally, 120 contexts out of 243
considered, were not associated with a conventional sensitive
category by any worker. We loosely group the contexts whose
answer anonymity ratio exceeds one standard deviation but do
not belong to any of the conventionally considered sensitive
categories into themes, and present the themes and the contexts
supportive of them in Table II.

Our ﬁndings based on this analysis methodology support
the hypothesis that data sensitivity is quite nuanced, and that
sensitive topics include but are not limited to the ones typically
considered.

3) Topic data: We repeat a similar analysis to the one
performed for Quora contexts above, for Quora topics. Specif-
ically, there are 53,551 topics on Quora that have at least 1
question with at least 1 answer and at least 1 follower. The
average number of questions per topic is 22.6, larger than the
average per context, since each question is labeled with at
most one context but may be labeled with many topics. We
consider only the most popular topics, i.e., those that have
at least 23 questions, in our analysis. The 6,799 topics with
at least 23 questions each, contain 418,575 questions with a
total of 1,027,549 answers, 178,038 of which are anonymous,
suggesting 0.17 overall anonymity rate. We further limit our
analysis to the 4,067 topics that, in addition to being comprised
of at least 23 questions each, contain at least 138 answers, i.e.,
on average, 6 answers per question, as in the analysis above.
These 4,067 topics have a total of 408,828 questions with a
total of 1,014,300 answers, 175,986 of which are anonymous.
For each topic T of the 4,067 topics that contain at least
23 questions and at least 138 answers, we compute its answer
anonymity ratio, A(T ), as the fraction of anonymous answers
received to questions within that topic to the total number of
answers received to questions within that topic. Similarly, we
compute its follower anonymity ratio, F (T ), as the fraction of
anonymous followers among the total number of followers. We

Context name

# Questions

# Answers

# Anonymous

# Anonymous A(C)

Followers

# Followers

3062
194
180
224
926
453
702
191
209
1268
371
298
431
213

1584
88
79
85
378
206
320
60
71
441
150
126
202
69

F (C)

0.341
0.312
0.305
0.275
0.290
0.313
0.313
0.239
0.254
0.258
0.288
0.297
0.319
0.245

0.526
0.506
0.462
0.450
0.447
0.442
0.430
0.420
0.419
0.412
0.404
0.403
0.400
0.400

Sex
Penises
Political Thinking (1986 book)
Indian Muslims
Attractiveness and Attractive People
Cheating (relationship & marital inﬁdelity)
Anonymity on Quora
Patent Law
Greece
Palantir Technologies
Pick-Up Artists
Prostitution
Interracial Dating and Relationships
Intellectual Property

449
28
26
40
85
51
78
52
36
58
32
24
37
54

Answers

561
41
42
49
140
69
74
37
31
40
46
29
44
38

1067
81
91
109
313
156
172
88
74
97
114
72
110
95
TABLE I

QUORA CONTEXTS WITH HIGH ANONYMITY RATIO, A(C)

Theme
Quora Product

Law & Government

Personal Experiences

Companies

Education and Educational Institutions

Relationships

Emotions & Emotional Experiences

Career

Humor
Science

Arts & Entertainment, Celebrities

Travel & Transportation

Social issues

History and Historical Events

Psychology and Philosophy

Popular Culture

Internet Privacy and Security

Food & Drink

Example Context Support
Quora Etiquette, Quora Moderation, Quora Cred-
its, Upvoting and Downvoting (Quora feature)
Patent Law, U.S. Foreign Policy and Foreign
Relations,Intellectual Property Law, Freedom of
Speech, U.S. Supreme Court, Justice
What Does it Feel Like to X?, High School, The
College and University Experience, Teenagers
and Teenage Years
Zynga, Square Inc., Sparrow, Palantir Technolo-
gies, Management Consulting and Management
Consulting Firms
The Ivy League, Graduate School Admissions,
Harvard College, Law School
Interpersonal Interaction, Friendship, Meeting
New People, Family and Families
Love, Bullying, Breakups, Humor

Work-Life Balance, Unemployment, Workplace
and Professional Etiquette, People Skills
Jokes, Pranks, Joke Question
Civil Engineering, Higgs Boson, NASA, Architec-
ture, Materials Science, Space Shuttle

Royalty, Celebrities, Fictional Characters, Rush
Limbaugh

Flying, Airlines, Trains (transportation service),
Air Travel, Google Self-Driving Cars
Sexism, Economic Inequality, Manners and Eti-
quette, Human Behavior, Social Advice
Apollo 11: 1969 Moon Landing, U.S. Presidents,
Conspiracy Theories
Child Psychology, Gender Differences, Human
Behavior, IQ, Intelligence, Child Psychology,
Morals and Morality
The Hunger Games (2012 Movie), Harry Potter
Book 7 Deathly Hallows (2007 book)
Trolling on the Internet, Hacking (computer
security), Hackers, Anonymity on Quora, Search
Engines, Computer Security
Drinking (alcohol), Eggs, Vegetarianism, Cheese,
Recipes

Example Topic Support
Quora User Tips, Quora User Feedback

International Law and Legal Institutions, Legis-
lation, Central Intelligence Agency, Freedom of
Speech, Tax Law, U.S. Constitutional Law
Life Decisions, What Would You Do if X?, What
Does It Feel Like to X?

The Boston Consulting Group, Bain and Com-
pany, Blekko, What Is It Like to Work At X?

Yale University, Cornell University, Exams and
Tests
Relationship Counseling, Interpersonal Conﬂicts,
Working and Dealing with Difﬁcult People
Sadness, Embarrassment, Crying, Annoyances,
Jealousy, Revenge
Women in Technology, PhD Careers

Jokes, Laughing
Aerospace Engineering, Polymaths, String Theory,
Scientiﬁc Explanations, Anthropology, Mathemat-
ical Optimization
Celebrity Gossip, Art Collecting, Music Videos,
Warren Buffett, Michael Arrington, Marissa
Mayer
Airfares, Airports, Subways, Flights, Highways

Social Customs, Human Rights, Civil Society,
Immigration Policy, Pro-Life Movement
Ancient Greece, World War I

Emotions, Self-Esteem, Ethics, Existentialism,
Bad Habits

Voldemort (Harry Potter character), Doomsday

Hacker Culture, Hackers, Internet Etiquette

Flavors, Grilling, Sauces, Steak, Ice Cream,
Tastes of Meat

POPULAR THEMES AMONG THE CONTEXTS AND TOPICS THAT ARE NOT COVERED BY CONVENTIONAL SENSITIVITY ASSUMPTIONS

TABLE II

499

Topic name

# Questions

# Answers

# Anonymous

Answers

# Anonymous A(T )

Followers

# Followers

1408
706
468
880
541
2050
650
13314
4715
674
515
434
881
327
605
707
2038
1409
1239
664
587
627
575
1292
535
737
481
266
2077
682
749
381
1588
664
525

748
398
223
427
262
994
270
6429
2107
236
272
189
374
122
279
242
934
554
538
284
245
166
198
541
209
297
163
113
792
275
321
140
680
262
216

F (T )

0.347
0.361
0.323
0.327
0.326
0.327
0.293
0.326
0.309
0.259
0.346
0.303
0.298
0.272
0.316
0.255
0.314
0.282
0.303
0.300
0.294
0.209
0.256
0.295
0.281
0.287
0.253
0.298
0.276
0.287
0.300
0.269
0.300
0.283
0.291

0.545
0.541
0.520
0.503
0.494
0.491
0.474
0.453
0.441
0.438
0.434
0.422
0.420
0.417
0.413
0.412
0.411
0.409
0.409
0.396
0.395
0.395
0.392
0.391
0.391
0.390
0.387
0.382
0.380
0.380
0.379
0.379
0.378
0.377
0.377

Relationship with X?

Orgasms
Masturbation
Genitalia
Penises
Female Sexuality
Adult Content on Quora
LSD
Sex
Sexuality
What Does It Feel Like to Be in a

Male Sexuality
Internet Pornography
Rape
Abuse
Psychology of Sexuality
Investment Banks
Anonymity on Quora
Interracial Dating and Relationships
Sexual Ethics
Drug Effects
Seduction
Lady Gaga
Game (seduction technique)
Why Do Women Do or Like X?
Sexual Orientation
Sex Workers & Prostitution
Transgender
Bathroom Etiquette
Cannabis
Being Single
Sexual Attraction
University of Pennsylvania
Pornography
Bipolar Disorder
Casual Sex

137
107
67
108
50
184
70
1514
542
33
80
61
92
39
59
65
207
103
110
88
34
112
47
74
61
88
80
38
310
57
75
33
224
72
54

363
246
173
292
170
646
154
4258
1520
162
205
147
338
168
184
170
526
479
443
225
210
228
166
473
202
205
191
165
849
266
277
177
450
228
154

198
133
90
147
84
317
73
1930
671
71
89
62
142
70
76
70
216
196
181
89
83
90
65
185
79
80
74
63
323
101
105
67
170
86
58

(cid:2)
A(T )

(cid:3)

QUORA TOPICS WITH HIGH ANONYMITY RATIO, A(T )
(cid:2)
= 0.173, stdev

= 0.068;

A(T )

(cid:3)

TABLE III

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

F (T )

observe that: mean
= 0.039. Furthermore,
mean
answer anonymity ratios and follower anonymity ratios are
highly correlated, corr(A, F ) = 0.88.

= 0.181, stdev

(cid:2)
F (T )

(cid:3)

4) Topic-based Results: Table III presents statistics for those
35 topics whose A(T ) is three standard deviations above
the mean. As becomes immediately clear from the table, the
most sensitive topics are dominated by the adult themes of
sex, sexuality, sexual orientation, pornography, and by the
theme of drugs. However, even among these, there are outliers:
Lady Gaga, Bathroom Etiquette, University of Pennsylvania,
conﬁrming our hypothesis from the study of contexts that topics
considered sensitive by users are not limited to the obvious
ones, and that education, celebrities, and personal experiences
may be important exception themes.

Similar to the manual analysis done for contexts, we hired
ﬁve workers to label all the 596 Quora topics whose answer
anonymity ratio, A(T ), exceeds one standard deviation above
the mean. As was the case for contexts, a high number of topics,
namely 188, were not associated with any of the conventionally
considered sensitive categories by any of the workers. Our
loose categorization of these topics into themes is presented
in Table II.

The analysis based on topics lends support for all typically

considered sensitive categories, including criminal record, via
high answer anonymity ratios for topics such as: Capital
Punishment, Organized Crime, When the Police Arrest You
or Pull You Over.
B. Discussion of Approach and Findings

1) The Approach: Although we present the results based
only on answer anonymity ratio, A, the results based on
the follower anonymity ratio, F , are quite similar for both
contexts and topics. This is not unexpected, based on previously
mentioned high correlation between the two measures (0.84
in the case of contexts and 0.88 in the case of topics), and
the common sense that given the Quora features, someone
who prefers not to associate one’s interest in a topic with their
real name, would also prefer to answer questions in that topic
anonymously, and vice versa. Several notable exceptions to
this, where A is signiﬁcantly higher than F are the topics
and contexts of: Patent Law, Orgasms, Genitalia; whereas the
situation is reversed for Interviews (Behavioral), Student Loans
and Debt, Immigration.

We have explored two methodologies for inferring sensi-
tivity: one based on contexts (Section IV-A1) and another
based on topics (Section IV-A3), and both yield similar and
consistent results, which adds conﬁdence to the methodology
and robustness of ﬁndings.

500

2) Search Engine Privacy Impact Mitigation: Furthermore,
it is important to remember that due to the method used for
data collection, we are not able to distinguish between answers
and followers that are truly anonymous versus those that are
marked as such due to “Search Engine Privacy” settings by
those users. Although this is a potentially signiﬁcant limitation,
we believe it has a limited impact on the conclusions made in
the preceding analyses for the following reasons.

Firstly, the “Search Engine Privacy” setting is not enabled
by default on Quora, which likely implies its limited utilization
since users rarely change defaults [45]. Secondly, users who
seek out and choose to enable this setting likely do so
because of the nature of the questions they are following
or answering, and their desire to protect their privacy while
doing so, advancing an argument that actions by users whose
“Search Engine Privacy” setting is enabled should be viewed as a
weaker, but also possibly valid, indicators of sensitivity. Finally,
if the previous argument is not correct, then the limitation due
to search engine privacy should affect all topics and contexts
at an equal rate in expectation, making the absolute anonymity
ratios for topics and contexts higher than the true ones, but
doing so equally, and therefore, enabling correct conclusions
based on the relative comparisons between the average ratios.
To verify the previous two hypotheses, we randomly sampled
100 question URLs which include a context and have at least
6 answers from each of the following groups of questions: our
entire crawl, the 14 contexts with the highest anonymity ratio
(Table I), our crawl excluding the 14 contexts with the highest
anonymity ratio, the contexts ranked 15-28 according to the
anonymity ratio. For each of the 100 questions, we manually
loaded the corresponding Quora page while being signed-in
(and thereby, bypassing the crawl limitation) and noted the
total number of answers and number of anonymous answers
for it. Table IV presents the anonymity ratio computed for each
of the four groups of questions based on the data not subject
to the “Search Engine Privacy” limitation and the data subject
to it. As expected, the true anonymity ratios are lower than the
ones computed based on our crawl, but the relative magnitudes
are unchanged, with questions from contexts ranked 1-14 and
15-28 based on our crawl exhibiting signiﬁcantly higher true
anonymity ratios than the average.

Set from Which Questions Chosen

All data
Contexts ranked 1-14 based on A(C)
All data excluding contexts ranked 1-14
Contexts ranked 15-28 based on A(C)

True
A(C)
0.08
0.30
0.06
0.18

A(C) w/ “Search
Engine Privacy”
0.17
0.48
0.19
0.38

ANONYMITY RATIOS COMPUTED ON CRAWL DATA SUBJECT TO “SEARCH

ENGINE PRIVACY” CONSTRAINT VS MANUALLY OBTAINED DATA NOT

TABLE IV

SUBJECT TO IT

These ﬁndings lend credibility to our hypothesis that the
impact of “Search Engine Privacy” on our conclusion is limited,
as long as we rely on relative, rather than absolute values
of anonymity ratios when comparing contexts and topics for
sensitivity. We base most of our analyses in the subsequent
sections on the data from identiﬁed contexts and topics with

501

high anonymity ratio, and therefore, hope to further mitigate the
impact of our crawl limitation due to “Search Engine Privacy”.
3) Surprising Findings: Although, arguably, many readers
would have predicted that the themes of relationships, law &
government, and personal experiences would be among the
ones for which Quora anonymity features are highly utilized,
there are several themes among our ﬁndings whose prominence
among the topics and contexts for whom anonymity is utilized
is quite unexpected. In particular, we speculate on the reasons
for some of the unexpected ﬁndings:

• Answers to education and educational institution related
questions are often anonymous spurred by questions such
as “What are the downsides of attending Harvard as an
undergrad?”6

• Answers to questions related to particular companies
are often anonymous due to possibility of disclosing
information that only insiders of the company have
access to, e.g., “How do Zynga employees feel about
the company’s summer 2012 stock price drop?”7

• Humor makes the list because of answers or questions that
are not politically correct or may hurt someone’s feelings,
e.g., “What’s the most offensive joke ever?”8

• Celebrities – because users may be interested in the gossip
but not eager to admit it, e.g., “Who are famous people
who had/have relationships with dogs?”9

• Several topics related to online privacy and security also
elicit a high rate of anonymous answers and followers.

One hypothesis for the unifying reason for these seemingly
surprising sensitive themes is that
they combine a topic
with feelings, personal experiences or thoughts, or insider
information. This suggests one avenue for possible future work
in order to develop better privacy-preserving features that would
enable users to share without regrets or negative consequences
– to rely not only on a set of pre-identiﬁed sensitive topics,
but to also evaluate whether the question or its answers may
include personal experiences, feelings, judgements, emotions,
or insider information. Another possible conclusion is one that
supports the main thesis of this research – content sensitivity is
quite nuanced, and one of the core methods to understand and
accommodate users’ preferences should be based on a data-
driven analysis of user actions related to the use of privacy-
enhancing features in the product for which the sensitivity
policies are to be set.

V. SENSITIVE WORDS

In this section, we perform an analysis that compares
vocabulary of anonymous answers with the vocabulary of non-
anonymous answers. As was the case for topics and contexts,

6http://www.quora.com/Harvard-College/What-are-the-downsides-of-

attending-Harvard-as-an-undergrad, 9 answers, 8 of them anonymous

7https://www.quora.com/Zynga-Stock-Price-Collapse-Summer-2012/How-
do-Zynga-employees-feel-about-the-companys-summer-2012-stock-price-
drop, 21 answers, 17 of them anonymous

8https://www.quora.com/Whats-the-most-offensive-joke-ever, 56 answers,

30 of them anonymous

9http://www.quora.com/Celebrities/Who-are-famous-people-who-had-

have-relationships-with-dogs, 4 answers, 1 of them anonymous

the words that are more prominent in anonymous answers are
not limited to the expected set.

A. Word Data

We limit our analysis of sensitive words to answers from
questions that belong to one of the 243 contexts whose
anonymity ratio, A(C), exceeds the overall average by at
least one standard deviation identiﬁed in Section IV-A2. Such
a choice allows us to partially mitigate the impact of “Search
Engine Privacy” limitation, as the anonymity ratio is higher
in these contexts regardless (see discussion in Section IV-B2).
We do not use word stemming in order to preserve ability to
easily reason about ﬁndings rather than have to guess the word
a particular root form is arising from. Hence, we observe some
root word repetitions in the reported results, e.g., both singular
and plural forms of the same word.

Among the answers analyzed, 60,912 distinct words occur
1,952,979 times. For every word, we calculate its number
of occurrences in anonymous answers and its number of
occurrences in non-anonymous answers. The average number
of occurrences of a word in anonymous answers is 10.2 and
in nonanonymous – 21.8, with the latter being (unsurprisingly)
higher than the former since there are more nonanonymous
answers than anonymous ones. To avoid making statistically
spurious observations, we exclude words with less than 32
(= 10.2 + 21.8) occurrences in total among all answers from
consideration. Among the remaining, reasonably frequent,
5,396 words, we manually identify and remove 114 so-called
stop words (such as “like”, “the”, “and”, “or”, etc.). The
remaining 5,281 words occur a total of 939,849 times. We
analyse these words to identify strong indicators of answer
anonymity and content sensitivity.

B. Analysis Methodologies

We explore two methodologies – one statistical and another
natural language processing based – for identifying words
that are strong indicators of anonymity. We do not claim one
method is better than the other, but only highlight the fact
that multiple analysis approaches exist and may offer slightly
differing perspectives. An online service provider may choose
to combine several such techniques in practice.

1) Statistical Analysis: In our ﬁrst methodology, for each
word, we divide its number of occurrences in anonymous
answers by the total number of all word occurrences in
anonymous answers to obtain its normalized rate of occur-
rence in anonymous answers, RA(W ). Similarly, we com-
pute RN (W ) based on number of the occurrences in non-
anonymous answers. We then compute each word’s anonymity
ratio, A(W ), as RA/RN . We observe that, mean
=
(cid:2)
1.05, median

= 0.98, stdev

(cid:2)
A(W )

(cid:2)
A(W )

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

A(W )

(cid:3)

= 0.69.

The intuition behind such choice of measurements is that
a word W that is not relevant to the outcome of whether the
answer is anonymous or not will have approximately the same
rate of occurrence in both types of answers, i.e., RA(W ) ≈
RN (W ), whereas for a word relevant to the outcome, RA
will signiﬁcantly exceed RN . Conﬁrming this, the average and

502

proverbs, verifone, transgender, leviticus, revelation, breasts, asians, queue,
vagina, merchants, boiling, gorgeous, orgasm, vietnamese, gulf, turkey,
apology, boson, reader, borderline, lift, modeling, merchant, mastercard,
bidding, laughing, payment, girlfriends, sue, testament, arthur, square,
arabic, ashamed, commission, loop, aggressively, clearance, afﬁrmative,
feminists, astronauts, righteous, lds, bedroom, relatives, faithful, pregnancy,
saudi, medication, retail, witness, grandfather, denied, admissions, lane,
secretly, leg, api, nerd, orbiter, translations, bird, immigration, rape,
reproduction, bond, pitch, wet, ofﬁcers, tuna, kissing, stereotype, gate,
transaction, colleges, card, wash, jack, lover, spoon, christ, governments,
sour, faculty, nervous, dress, dorm, graduates, sticking, academics, cross-
ing, forgiveness, partial, neighbors, girlfriend, quran, terribly, acquiring,
customers, grandmother

Fig. 5. Words with High Anonymity Ratio, A(W ). In italics – those that
belong to conventionally sensitive themes; in bold – those that do not, according
to manual categorization by the authors.

square, quora, answer, content, nondual, asians, sex, card, proverbs,
merchants, merchant, testament, reader, gay, verifone, payment, user, christ,
questions, girlfriend, boson, palantir, leviticus, asian, question, revelation,
woman, transgender, going, bible, english, committee, messiah, college,
world, israel, women, turkey, marines, gods, anon, date, site, lift, orgasm,
story, dress, feel, friends, queue, gorgeous, eyed, charlie, zynga, followers,
girl, judas, ryan, customers, night, pregnancy, transaction, higgs, cheese,
men, jack, jesus, feminists, vagina, admins, relatives, atheists, deeper,
france, rape, parents, girlfriends, breasts, modeling, apology, posts, speech,
jewish, lane, gps, ﬁction, another, feet, morality, partner, aging, technical,
science, jon, form, beef, leaf, boiling, gulf, vietnamese

Fig. 6. Sensitive Words based on Likelihood Ratio Test. In italics – those
that belong to conventionally sensitive themes; in bold – those that do not,
according to manual categorization by the authors.

median of A are both close to 1; whereas there are 159 words
with word anonymity ratio, A(W ), at least three standard
deviations above the mean of A. We present the top 100
words based on their anonymity ratio in Figure 5, formatted
analogously to the coding of contexts in Section IV-A2.

2) Collocation Analysis: In our second methodology, we
apply the likelihood ratio test, typically used in word collocation
discovery in natural language processing [46], to our problem.
We model our sensitive word discovery problem as a
collocation discovery problem, where instead of attempting to
discover a word’s collocation with another word, we look
for signiﬁcant collocations between a word and a label –
“anonymous” or “nonanonymous”, in a corpus obtained by
converting each occurrence of a word w in an anonymous
answer into an instance of w with label “anonymous”, and
each occurrence of w in a nonanonymous answer – into an
instance of w with label “nonanonymous”. The likelihood ratio
test with each label then quantitatively evaluates two alternative
hypotheses – the word being independent or dependent of the
label, with the log likelihood ratio of the maximum likelihood
estimates of those hypotheses enabling ranking of the words
(and their co-occurrence with the label) by their signiﬁcance.
As is standard in NLP [46], we rank collocations in the
decreasing order of −2 times the log of their likelihood ratios.
Since we are interested in identifying sensitive words, we
present the top 100 words co-occurring with the “anonymous”
label in Figure 6.

C. Discussion of Findings

As the two methodologies rely on different underlying
principles, a top ranked word identiﬁed using one methodology
might not appear in the top 100 words obtained using the other
methodology. However, this does not mean that the second
method did not identify any correlation between the speciﬁc
word and anonymity. In fact, though the ordering is different,
we observe a signiﬁcant overlap among the words identiﬁed as
anonymity indicators by the two methods. Even among the top
100 words listed in Figures 5 and 6, there are several overlaps,
such as transgender, proverbs, verifone, leviticus, etc.

As is evident from Figures 5 and 6, the proportion of
words that are not typically considered sensitive among those
identiﬁed as sensitive via our data-driven analysis is quite high.
We manually group the words not typically considered sensitive
and identify several noteworthy themes:
• Law & Government, such as sue, witness
• Companies, such as verifone, zynga, quora, square, acquir-
• Education and Educational Institutions, such as admissions,
colleges, graduates, faculty, dorm, academics, committee
• Relationships, such as relatives, grandfather, neighbors,
• Emotions & Emotional Experiences, such as apology,
laughing, ashamed, aggressively, afﬁrmative, secretly, feel,
denied

grandmother, parents, followers, friends, customers

ing, palantir

• Career, such as modeling, astronauts, ofﬁcers, admins
• Science, such as boson, api, site, technical, science, orbiter
• Arts & Entertainment, such as ﬁction, story
• Travel & Transportation, such as gate
• Social Issues, such as immigration
• Food & Drink, such as cheese, beef, spoon
• People Qualities, such as gorgeous, righteous, faithful,

forgiveness, morality, stereotype
Many of these themes echo the ones identiﬁed in Section IV
and described in Table II, with the exception of the last –
related to People Qualities. There were no analogues for these
in context and topic analyses likely due to the absence of
context and topic labels conveying this theme among those
created by the Quora moderators.

As in the previous section, our ﬁndings support the hypothe-
sis that sensitivity is quite nuanced, and not limited to the typi-
cally considered sensitive topics and words. Concretely, among
the top 200 words identiﬁed using the above methodologies
(100 words from each technique), nearly 73% of words, evoking
the themes of emotions, relationships, career, etc., would be
missed if we relied only on the conventional assumptions.

Not all the words identiﬁed as characteristic of anonymous
answers, and therefore potentially sensitive, carry a negative
connotation. There are several positive words, such as: laughing,
gorgeous, righteous, faithful, forgiveness, and several neutral
words, such as acquiring, feel, admissions, committee, bidding.

503

This suggests that purely sentiment analysis-based methods [47]
that rely on the sentiment of the item being shared would not
be successful at predicting the item’s sensitivity.

Finally, besides serving as an additional conﬁrmation of the
hypothesis that sensitivity is nuanced, for which we found
evidence via the analysis of topics and contexts in Section IV,
the ability to build a vocabulary of potentially sensitive words
is valuable in its own right. For example, in scenarios when
users are sharing posts for which an accurate topic inference
is not feasible (e.g., due to the short length of a post or lack
of time or resources for manual labeling of its topic), having
a vocabulary of potentially sensitive words for that application
can power a cheap and easy-to-implement “Are you sure?”-type
feature with high potential gain for user privacy.

VI. TOWARDS AUTOMATED SENSITIVITY PREDICTION
In this section, we explore the possibility of training a
machine learning classiﬁer capable of warning users when
they are about to follow a potentially sensitive question or to
share or disclose something sensitive.

A. Question Sensitivity Prediction

To evaluate the possibility of predicting a question’s potential
sensitivity, we consider questions from contexts identiﬁed in
Section IV-A2 whose answer anonymity ratio, A(C), exceeds
the average by 2 standard deviations. We further limit the set
of questions to those 15,466 that have at least 6 answers, since
our goal is to predict a question’s sensitivity, and an accurate
computation of the anonymity rate among the question’s
answers is unlikely for questions with few answers. We label
a question as sensitive if the fraction of anonymous answers
to its total answers is at least 0.32, i.e., 2 standard deviations
above the average. The label was chosen in such a way as to
roughly correspond to a 95% conﬁdence interval [43].

Following the common machine learning practice, we
randomly partition the data into two datasets: one for training
and one for evaluation. The evaluation dataset consists of
1,000 questions in order to allow for a 0.1% precision in the
evaluation. The training dataset contains the remaining 14,466
questions. We note that given our question sensitivity labeling,
21.5% of the questions in the evaluation dataset are considered
sensitive, which establishes the baseline at 78.5%10.

We experiment with soft-margin classiﬁers, linear and SVM
classiﬁers, as they have been shown to be the most effective
on NLP tasks that involve short text, such as Twitter sentiment
analysis [47]. We use exhaustive search to evaluate the best
method to convert the words in the dataset into features (e.g.,
with or without stop word removal, with or without stemming,
using unigrams or bigrams, etc.), converging on no stop word
removal, no stemming, and use of bigrams as the transformation
that yields the best accuracy when used in conjunction with a
linear classiﬁer.11 We experimented with four distinct types of

10An algorithm that always predicts that the question is not sensitive will

achieve a 78.5% accuracy.

11We did not perform an analogous exhaustive search for the SVM classiﬁer

due to its prohibitive computational cost.

the bigram feature representations, namely: binary, occurrence
count, term frequency, and TF-IDF, and concluded that the
frequency representation works best. For the linear classiﬁer,
we tested various regularization modes, including L1 and L2.
For the SVM classiﬁer with an RBF kernel we performed a
grid search to determine the optimal gamma and cost.

Table V presents the outcome of attempts to predict a
question’s sensitivity when each of the trained models is tested
on the evaluation set. Overall, the best accuracy achieved is
80.4%, which represents a slight improvement relative to the
baseline of 78.5%. Even with a small training sample and
noise due to “Search Engine Privacy”, our machine learning
predictions of question sensitivity outperform the baseline.
However, our results also suggest that relying purely on the
content may not be sufﬁcient and more information needs
to be factored when evaluating the potential sensitivity of
sharing something. We discuss several candidates for additional
information, such as a person-speciﬁc sensitivity measure
and the nuance of sensitivity depending on a person in
Sections VII-A and VII-B.

Algorithm
Linear classiﬁer
SVM linear kernel
SVM RBF kernel

Parameters
–
c=0.0029
c=850 g=0.01

Accuracy

80.4%
79.9%
80.2%

PERFORMANCE OF ALGORITHMS PREDICTING QUESTION SENSITIVITY
B. Answer Sensitivity Prediction

TABLE V

We run a set of experiments similar to the ones described
in the previous section in order to assess whether it is possible
to predict the sensitivity of an answer from its context and
content. We limit our consideration to answers that contain at
least 80 characters, which signiﬁcantly decreases the number
of answers, and experiment with two datasets. The ﬁrst one,
S, contains 3,660 answers to the questions that were labeled
as sensitive in the question sensitivity experiment above. The
second one, A, contains 151,825 answers to questions from
the 1,525 contexts analyzed in Section IV-A1. As above, we
randomly partition our data into a training and evaluation sets,
with 1,000 answers in the evaluation datasets to allow for a
0.1% precision in the evaluation.

Algorithm
Linear classiﬁer
SVM linear kernel
SVM RBF kernel

Parameters
L1
c=385
c=2 g= 0.00195

Accuracy

62.3%
63.1%
61.7%

PERFORMANCE OF ALGORITHMS PREDICTING ANSWER SENSITIVITY, S

TABLE VI

CORPUS

Class
Anonymous
Non-anonymous

Precision
0.63
0.61
TABLE VII

Recall
0.22
0.90

PRECISION AND RECALL FOR THE VARIOUS CLASSES, S CORPUS

In the evaluation subset of S, the fraction of anonymous
answers is 42.2%, setting a 57.8% baseline (using an algorithm
that always predicts an answer will be non-anonymous).

504

Table VI reports the performance accuracy of our answer
anonymity predictor for the evaluation part of S, with the
best algorithm12 achieving an accuracy of 63.1%, which is
5.3% above the baseline. When evaluating precision and recall,
reported in Table VII, the following conclusions emerge: ﬁrst,
predictions of anonymous and non-anonymous class have
roughly the same precision which suggests that content provides
information in both directions. Second, the weakest part of the
prediction is the recall for the anonymous class: barely 2 out of
10 anonymous answers are correctly classiﬁed by the algorithm.
This indicates that the biggest area of potential improvement
lies in ﬁnding additional features to improve anonymous recall.
In the evaluation subset of A, the fraction of anonymous
answers is 16.5%, setting a 83.5% baseline. Table VIII
reports the performance accuracy of our answer anonymity
predictor using the Linear classiﬁer13, with the algorithm
achieving 88.0% accuracy, which is 4.5% above the baseline.
As was the case in question sensitivity prediction, our
answer sensitivity prediction results are able to beat
the
baseline performance even when given a small
training
set and in the presence of noise due to “Search Engine
Privacy”. The results highlight another important direction
for improving classiﬁcation quality: the need for additional
training data, as the hypothesis that
the quality of the
prediction will
improve with increase in the amount of
data available for training is supported by the observation
that our performance is better on the larger corpus, A, than on S.

Algorithm
Linear classiﬁer

Parameters
L1

Accuracy

88.0%

PERFORMANCE OF ALGORITHM PREDICTING ANSWER SENSITIVITY, A

TABLE VIII

CORPUS

Overall the experiments related to sensitivity prediction
support our hypothesis that it is possible to use a data-driven
approach of learning based on users’ use of privacy-enhancing
features, in order to provide better privacy protections for
them. On the other hand, the accuracies of our classiﬁers also
strongly suggest that predicting what is sensitive is a complex
and nuanced problem that could beneﬁt from additional features
and better training data.

VII. DISCUSSION

A. Limitations of the Study due to Dataset Choice

The dataset we collected and used for our study of content
sensitivity has several limitations, with implications for ability
to generalize the conclusions made on its basis to other
populations and other services and for the kind of statistical
analyses and machine learning models that are feasible to
perform on it.

Firstly, although Quora has a real name policy and many
users answer questions on Quora in order to build their

12Removing stop words, performing stemming, using unigrams and repre-

13SVM kernel models were not built due to their prohibitive computational

senting words as binary features.

costs on such a large corpus.

reputations as an expert in certain topics, and therefore, have
an incentive to use a real name, some may be creating
accounts using names other than their real one. Answering
using an account with a fake name is analogous to answering
anonymously from the perspective of risks we consider; hence,
although anecdotal evidence suggests most users use their real
name14, our ﬁndings are limited by the extent to which Quora
succeeds in enforcing the real names policy.

Secondly, although the Quora user base is fairly large and
diverse15, it may not be representative of users of other Internet
services. Furthermore, the true privacy paranoids are unlikely
to post on Quora or on any other online service. Therefore, our
inferences can be effectively applied to improve the privacy
of Quora’s products, and can serve as a starting point for
discussion on sensitivity, but would need additional service-
speciﬁc research in order to be properly generalized to other
services and other populations of users.

Thirdly, as discussed in Section III-C,

the reasons for
exercising anonymity choices on Quora may vary, and are
not limited to data sensitivity. However, both previous work
on user regrets about posting online [20] and Quora users’
self-report on usage of anonymity [40] suggest that content
sensitivity may be one of the signiﬁcant motivating factors.
Therefore, although one certainly cannot equate anonymity
with sensitivity, we believe that anonymity is a strong indicator
of potential sensitivity and our ﬁndings could serve as a starting
point for further research on the topic.

Fourthly, unlike Quora itself, we do not have a user-level
view of each user’s anonymous and non-anonymous answers.
Our inability to include user-speciﬁc features, such as gender
or tendency for anonymous answering, likely signiﬁcantly
hampers the quality of the anonymity predictors we can build16.
In practice, Quora has access to such information and would
not be subject to the same limitations were it to attempt to
learn privacy preferences based on its data or build features
that could help prevent regret. Furthermore, lack of a user-level
view prevents us from studying the potential differences in
preferences due to gender, age, location, etc.

Finally, our dataset quality is limited by the quality and
reach of the crawler we used. We cannot be sure that we
collected a complete snapshot of Quora, that our parsing of
the question page was perfect17, or that the access we have
to the followers of a question through the follower grid is
representative of all its followers. Another limitation due to
the crawler used relates to the Search Engine Privacy feature
of Quora. The inferences we make are based on both truly

14Many users link to their Facebook and Twitter accounts in their Quora

proﬁles.

15A recent press interview suggests that Quora has been experiencing a
healthy user growth in 2012-2013 [48]. Statistics provided by web trafﬁc
analytics companies Alexa [49], Compete [50], and trafﬁcestimate [51],
estimate that Quora has ∼1 million unique monthly visitors, and ∼30 million
total monthly visits. The user base is dominated by visitors from India and
the United States, who together account for more than 60% of the total trafﬁc.
16In a related scenario of analyzing online content, [52] ﬁnds that author

features have a strong discriminative power.

17We observed several answers that were blurred out with images or only

partially collected by the crawl, which we omitted.

505

anonymously written answers and those made anonymous due
to the search engine privacy setting of the writing user. As
described in Section IV-B2, we mitigate this limitation by
choosing analyses whose inferences are minimally affected
by such noise. We limit our word analyses and some of our
machine learning analyses to data from contexts which exhibit
elevated level of anonymity – ﬁrmly placing them above noise
that may be due to search engine privacy.

In spite of these limitations, we are able to make informative
inferences and develop sensitivity predictors which outperform
the baseline prediction rates. This suggests that in practice, the
service providers who are not constrained by the limitations
we face, should be able to both better understand their users’
privacy preferences and build predictors that enable them to
improve users’ privacy related experiences through introduction
of appropriate nudges or defaults.

B. Content Sensitivity is Subjective

As pointed out by privacy experts in [6], determining
content sensitivity is a complex problem. Content sensitivity
depends not only on the content but also on the context,
i.e., who is sharing the information and when, where and
with whom they are sharing it, along with what they are
sharing. Individuals may have widely differing anonymity
and sensitivity preferences, depending on their personalities,
cultural or religious backgrounds, experiences, etc. Consider
the following examples of Quora questions and answers that
illustrate that individual people may be making choices that
differ from those that would be expected from most users:
• The question, “Selﬁshness: What is the most selﬁsh thing
you have ever done?”18, has 12 (10 without search engine
privacy) anonymous answers out of 18 total answers.
However, one user gave the following very personal answer
non-anonymously, and even provided a link to her Facebook
account19: “Thought that my husband and 2 young children
could wait a year while I enjoyed, for the ﬁrst time in my
life, my job. At the end of the year, my marriage was in a
shambles, and my eldest daughter was dead.”
• The question, “Why do homeless people wear so much
clothing?”20, has 6 (2 without search engine privacy)
anonymous answers out of 9 total answers. The following
answer was provided anonymously, though there isn’t
anything obviously sensitive in it – “I always assumed
the reason they usually wear clothing in layers is because
they have no storage facility to stash them. They always
say: dress in layers in SF. Seriously, it can be 30 degrees
in the morning (or colder) and 70 in the afternoon. In
addition the extra layers are versatile, they can double as
blankets and pillows. Also, many homeless people have
issues with hoarding. Obviously you can’t be a hoarder if

18https://www.quora.com/Selﬁshness/What-is-the-most-selﬁsh-thing-you-

19We believe this user is not using her real name.
20https://www.quora.com/Homelessness/Why-do-homeless-people-wear-

have-ever-done

so-much-clothing

you are homeless but frequently they “collect” stuff and
hang on to it.”
• A question related to murders, “What does it feel like
to murder someone?”21, may be expected to have many
anonymous answers. However, only 1 out of the 9 answers
for it is anonymous.
• The question trying to understand reasons for anonymous
answers, “What drives people to contribute anonymous
answers on Quora?”22, also contains many anonymous
answers – 21 (17 without search engine privacy) of the 27.

C. Correlation with a User Survey

We initiate a study that aims to compare our behavioral
data-driven ﬁndings with survey-based ones, via a short user
survey using Google Consumer Surveys [12], a new public
tool that enables anyone to quickly and cheaply run surveys
online. To provide an (imperfect) parallel with our study of
sensitivity based on Quora anonymity choices, we posed the
questions:

1) Of the following topics, which ones would you be
comfortable writing about online using your real name?
2) Of the following topics, which ones would you be

comfortable writing about online anonymously?

The topics included in the choices were: Prostitution, Recre-
ational Drugs, Depression, Friendship, Government Leaders
and Politicians, Religion and Beliefs (high anonymity ratio
according to analysis in Section IV), and Mobile Phone and
Superhero Films (low anonymity ratio). Selection of more than
one answer was permitted, along with the option ”None of the
above”. The topic presentation order was randomized.

Figure 7 presents the results based on 1,500 responses
received for each question, with respondents chosen to be
representative of the US Internet population (via the quota
method provided by [12]). The results highlight the difﬁculty of
eliciting user privacy preferences and sensitivities, as although
participation in online sharing platforms such as Twitter and
Tumblr is skyrocketing,
the vast majority of respondents
indicated they would not be comfortable writing online even
about the seemingly innocuous topic of Mobile Phones. On the
other hand, they give support to the validity and promise of our
proposed approach: ﬁrstly, for most topics, the respondents’
indicated comfort level is higher when assuming they’d be
answering anonymously rather than with their real name,
supporting our hypothesis that anonymity choices may be
indicative of sensitivity. Secondly, the ranking of topics by
percentage of respondents who’d be comfortable writing about
it is different, but not radically so, from the one derived in
Section IV. This suggests that behavioral-data driven analyses
and research based on user surveys could complement and
support each other.

21https://www.quora.com/What-Does-It-Feel-Like-to-X/What-does-it-feel-

22https://www.quora.com/What-drives-people-to-contribute-anonymous-

like-to-murder-someone

answers-on-Quora/

Anonymous
Real name

Recreational Drugs

Prostitution

Legal Topics

Depression

Poverty

Superhero  Films

Religion & Beliefs

Government Leaders

Mobile Phones

Friendship

7.8%

4.5%

7.2%

4.8%

7.3%

6.4%

10.7%

6.9%

9.7%

8.2%

9.6%

10.9%

14.1%

12.1%

14.2%

13.2%

11.6%

13.3%

16.1%

19.1%

0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14% 16% 18% 20% 22% 24%

Fig. 7. Percentage of respondents who indicated they’d be comfortable writing
about a topic anonymously vs with their real name.

Much more extensive research, which is beyond the scope of
this paper, is needed in order to understand the relative merits of
survey-based and behavioral data-based approaches to eliciting
privacy preferences and learning about data sensitivity. For
example, our survey results present some supportive evidence
that gender may affect sensitivity perception and sharing
comfort. The survey results suggest that women may be more
comfortable writing about Friendship with their real names
than men – 20.5% vs 12.8% (p-value 0.02), while men may
be more willing to discuss Prostitution anonymously than
women – 3.8/7 vs 3.3/7 (p-value 0.02). We leave an in-depth
investigation of factors affecting sensitivity perceptions and
comparison between approaches to future work.

VIII. RELATED WORK

1) Understanding User Privacy Preferences via Surveys:
Online surveys and personal
interviews are the predomi-
nant method currently used for learning about user privacy
expectations, and identifying problems in existing privacy-
related offerings. They have been used to examine privacy
preferences in e-commerce [53], understanding concerns related
to disclosure of health information online [54], learn about
privacy expectations in location based systems [55], [56], [57]
and in social networks [58], [59]. Surveys have also been used
to understand why people regret posting online and identify
sensitive topic themes [20], or to capture user preferences about
anonymity and data sensitivity online [60].

Survey-based learning of privacy preferences is more difﬁcult
and more expensive than our proposed approach when it needs
to be adopted to a speciﬁc product, to potential cultural, loca-
tion, language or demographic-based differences in preferences
among users, or to shift in preferences over time. However, they
are a useful complementary approach to that of the behavioral

506

data-driven one we propose, and can help in formulating
questions or hypotheses, providing illustrative examples, etc.
The survey-based work with the goal most similar to ours by
Wang et al [20] identiﬁes anecdotal examples of user sharing
regrets from many of the same themes we discover: personal
and family issues, religion and politics, work and company,
sex, and illegal drug use.

2) Understanding Privacy Risks of Product Usage: Under-
standing how users use product features with potential privacy
implications can help identify and mitigate potential privacy
risks. [27] studies the security and privacy of private browsing
modes in web browsers and how installed plugins and browser
extensions may undermine the security of private browsing.
[61] performs a large-scale quantitative analysis of delete tweet
feature in Twitter, and highlights the privacy ramiﬁcations of
availability of deleted tweets outside of Twitter. [62] performs
a quantitative study of the amount and kinds of personally
identiﬁable information disclosed in Twitter messages and
potential privacy implications of such disclosures.

3) Minimizing Regret When Sharing: Recent work has begun
to make steps towards understanding and minimizing user
regret when sharing on social networks. Via a combination
of surveys, interviews and log analyses, [26] investigates how
active users organize and select audiences for sharing content
on the Google+ social network. [63] studies deleted bullying
tweets on Twitter, and proposes building a regrettable tweets
predictor to warn users if a tweet might cause user regret later.
[64] proposes a template for the design of a social networking
privacy wizard, that builds a machine learning classier to
learn from a small sample of user’s privacy preferences,
and then uses this classiﬁer to conﬁgure the user’s privacy
settings automatically. Our work, particularly in Section VI,
complements these efforts and provides evidence in support of
feasibility of product features aimed at minimizing regret.

4) Other Work Studying Quora: Our work is not the ﬁrst
in using Quora to gain insights into individuals’ behavior. For
example, [42] makes an attempt to understand what drives the
growth of question-and-answer websites like Quora, and how
does it attract and motivate visitors to contribute, while [41]
studies the reputation mechanisms in Quora, i.e., how users
judge the authoritativeness of other users and content, build
reputation, and identify and promote high quality content.

IX. CONCLUSION

We performed a large-scale analysis of user anonymity
choices during their activity on Quora, a popular question-and-
answer site, to determine user content sensitivity preferences.
We enumerated different analysis methodologies on contexts,
topics, and words, and identiﬁed sensitive themes that are not
included in the common characterizations of content sensitivity.
We built several machine learning models able to predict user
anonymity choices better than a ﬁxed guess would, suggesting
a possibility for features improving user experience.

Although much more in-depth research is needed, our work
makes the ﬁrst step to show that data-driven analysis of users’
use of privacy-enhancing product features can improve our

507

ability to understand user privacy preferences and expectations
at scale, and enable online services to develop policies and
features that better protect their users.

X. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Vasyl Pihur for help with statistical
analyses and valuable feedback on the work. We thank Pern Hui
Chia, Dorothy Chou, and Jessica Staddon for useful feedback
on the paper drafts, and ´Ulfar Erlingsson for the title suggestion.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for thoughtful comments
and suggestions.

REFERENCES

[1] “Harlem shake: Baauer cashes in on viral video’s massive YouTube
success,” http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/feb/19/harlem-
shake-baauer-youtube-success, Accessed: Nov 13, 2013.

[2] S. Choney, “Kony video proves social media’s role as youth news
source: Pew,” http://www.nbcnews.com/technology/kony-video-proves-
social-medias-role-youth-news-source-pew-455365, Accessed: Mar 14,
2014.

[3] “When the Self-Published Authors Take Over, What Will Publishers
Do?” http://www.forbes.com/sites/jeremygreenﬁeld/2013/04/30/when-the-
self-published-authors-take-over-what-will-publishers-do/.

[4] “Facebook and Twitter Postings Cost CFO His Job,” http://online.wsj.com/
articles/SB10001424052702303505504577404542168061590, Accessed:
Nov 11, 2013.

[5] “The Red Cross’ Rogue Tweet: #gettngslizzerd On Dogﬁsh Head’s Mi-
das Touch,” http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/2011/02/16/red-cross-rogue-
tweet n 824114.html, Accessed: Nov 11, 2013.

[6] “First issue of CNIL IP Reports: “Privacy towards 2020” – 42 experts
share their visions of the future of privacy with the French regulation
authority,”
http://www.cnil.fr/linstitution/actualite/article/article/ﬁrst-
issue-of-cnil-ip-reports-privacy-towards-2020-42-experts-share-their-
visions-of-the, Accessed: Nov 11, 2013.

[7] “Quora,” http://quora.com/.
[8] “Google Policies and Principles,” http://www.google.com/policies/

privacy/key-terms/#toc-terms-info, Accessed: Nov 9, 2013.

[9] “Microsoft Advertising Creative Acceptance

Policy Guide,”

http://advertising.microsoft.com/en-uk/WWDocs/User/display/
cl/content standard/2007/global/Microsoft-Advertising-Creative-
Acceptance-Policy-Guide.pdf, Accessed: Nov 10, 2013.

[10] “Facebook Advertising Guidelines,” https://www.facebook.com/ad

guidelines.php, Accessed: Nov 9, 2013.
to Google,”

[11] “CNIL: Questionnaire

http://www.cnil.fr/ﬁleadmin/

documents/La CNIL/actualite/questionnaire to Google-2012-03-
16.pdf, Accessed: Nov 10, 2013.

[12] “Google

Consumer

Surveys,”

http://www.google.com/insights/

consumersurveys/home, Accessed: Nov 11, 2013.

[13] “Google Privacy Policy,” http://www.google.com/policies/privacy/, Ac-

cessed: Nov 9, 2013.

[14] S. L. Huang, “Removing feed stories about views,” http://blog.quora.

com/Removing-Feed-Stories-about-Views, Accessed: Nov 9, 2013.

[15] “CNIL,” http://www.cnil.fr/english/the-cnil/constitution-and-composition.
[16] “Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such
data,” http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:
31995L0046:en:HTML, Accessed: Nov 13, 2013.

[17] J. V. Grove, “Twitter your way to getting robbed,” http://mashable.com/

2009/06/01/twitter-related-burglary/, Accessed: Nov 5, 2013.
personal

[18] G.
get
SB10000872396390444165804578008740578200224,
Nov 4, 2013.

most
secrets
http://online.wsj.com/articles/
Accessed:

“When
Facebook,”

Fowler,
on

A.
outed

the

[19] K. Hill, “Oops. Mark Zuckerberg’s sister has a private Facebook photo go
public.” http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2012/12/26/oops-mark-
zuckerbergs-sister-has-a-private-facebook-photo-go-public/, Accessed:
Nov 4, 2013.

[43] F. Andrews, L. Klem, S. Institute, and P. O’Malley, Selecting Statistical
SAS

Techniques for Social Science Data: A Guide for SAS Users.
Institute, 1998.

[44] “Premier by mobileworks,” https://premier.mobileworks.com/.
[45] W. E. Mackay, “Triggers and barriers to customizing software,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI), 1991, pp. 153–160.

[46] C. D. Manning and H. Sch¨utze, Foundations of statistical natural

language processing. MIT Press, 1999.

[47] A. Agarwal, B. Xie, I. Vovsha, O. Rambow, and R. Passonneau,
“Sentiment analysis of Twitter data,” in Proceedings of the Workshop
on Languages in Social Media (LSM). Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2011, pp. 30–38.

[48] A. Tsotsis, “Quora Grew More Than 3X Across All Metrics In The
Past Year,” http://techcrunch.com/2013/05/28/quora-grows-more-than-
3x-across-all-metrics-in-the-past-year/.

[49] “Alexa – How popular is quora.com?” http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/

quora.com, Accessed: Mar 7, 2014.

[50] “Compete – Quora site info,” https://siteanalytics.compete.com/quora.

com/#.UxmRj mSzpo, Accessed: Mar 7, 2014.

[51] “trafﬁcestimate – quora.com Website Trafﬁc and Information,” http:

//www.trafﬁcestimate.com/quora.com, Accessed: Mar 7, 2014.

[52] B. Gelley and T. Suel, “Automated decision support for human tasks in
a collaborative system: The case of deletion in Wikipedia.” in WikiSym,
2013.

[53] M. S. Ackerman, L. F. Cranor, and J. Reagle, “Privacy in e-commerce:
Examining user scenarios and privacy preferences,” in Proceedings of
the 1st ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC), 1999, pp. 1–8.
[54] G. Bansal, F. . Zahedi, and D. Gefen, “The impact of personal dispositions
on information sensitivity, privacy concern and trust in disclosing health
information online,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 138–
150, 2010.

[55] S. Wilson, J. Cranshaw, N. Sadeh, A. Acquisti, L. F. Cranor, J. Springﬁeld,
S. Y. Jeong, and A. Balasubramanian, “Privacy manipulation and
acclimation in a location sharing application,” in Proceedings of the
2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing (UbiComp), 2013, pp. 549–558.

[56] E. Toch and I. Levi, “Locality and privacy in people-nearby applications,”
in Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp), 2013, pp. 539–548.

[57] S. Patil, G. Norcie, A. Kapadia, and A. J. Lee, “Reasons, rewards, regrets:
privacy considerations in location sharing as an interactive practice,” in
Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security
(SOUPS), 2012, pp. 5:1–5:15.

[58] L. Bauer, L. F. Cranor, S. Komanduri, M. L. Mazurek, M. K. Reiter,
M. Sleeper, and B. Ur, “The post anachronism: The temporal dimension
of Facebook privacy,” in Proceedings of the 12th Annual Workshop on
Privacy in the Electronic Society, Nov. 2013.

[59] Y. Liu, K. P. Gummadi, B. Krishnamurthy, and A. Mislove, “Analyzing
Facebook privacy settings: user expectations vs. reality,” in Proceedings
of the 11th ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), 2011.

[60] L. Rainie, S. Kiesler, R. Kang, and M. Madden, “Anonymity, Privacy,
and Security Online: Part 4: How Users Feel About the Sensitivity of
Certain Kinds of Data,” http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Anonymity-
online/Main-Report/Part-4.aspx, Accessed on Nov 15th 2013.

[61] H. Almuhimedi, S. Wilson, B. Liu, N. Sadeh, and A. Acquisti, “Tweets
are forever: a large-scale quantitative analysis of deleted tweets,” in
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW), 2013, pp. 897–908.

[62] L. Humphreys, P. Gill, and B. Krishnamurthy, How much is too much?

Privacy issues on Twitter. ACM Press, 2010, pp. 1–29.

[63] J.-M. Xu, B. Burchﬁel, X. Zhu, and A. Bellmore, “An examination of

regret in bullying tweets.” in HLT-NAACL, 2013, pp. 697–702.

[64] L. Fang and K. LeFevre, “Privacy wizards for social networking sites,”
in Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web
(WWW), 2010, pp. 351–360.

[20] Y. Wang, G. Norcie, S. Komanduri, A. Acquisti, P. G. Leon, and L. F.
Cranor, “‘I regretted the minute I pressed share’: a qualitative study
of regrets on Facebook,” in Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS), 2011, pp. 10:1–10:16.

[21] N. Singer, “They Loved Your G.P.A. Then They Saw Your
Tweets,” http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/10/business/they-loved-your-
gpa-then-they-saw-your-tweets.html, Accessed: Nov 13, 2013.

[22] L. Kwoh, “Beware: Potential Employers Are Watching You,” http://online.
wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390443759504577631410093879278,
Accessed: Nov 13, 2013.

[23] M. Miller, “Facebook Graph Search Will Find You The Per-
fect Date,” http://www.forbes.com/sites/mattmiller/2013/01/29/facebook-
graph-search-date/, Accessed: Nov 13, 2013.

[24] C. Breen, “Why I left Facebook,” http://www.pcworld.com/article/196237/

article.html, Accessed: Nov 4, 2013.

[25] J. V. Grove, “Why teens are tiring of Facebook,” http://news.cnet.com/
8301-1023 3-57572154-93/why-teens-are-tiring-of-facebook/, Accessed:
Nov 4, 2013.

[26] S. Kairam, M. Brzozowski, D. Huffaker, and E. Chi, “Talking in circles:
selective sharing in Google+,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), 2012, pp. 1065–1074.
[27] G. Aggarwal, E. Bursztein, C. Jackson, and D. Boneh, “An analysis of
private browsing modes in modern browsers,” in Proceedings of the 19th
USENIX Conference on Security, 2010, pp. 79–94.

[28] “Tor: Anonymity Online,” https://www.torproject.org/.
[29] C.-Y. Chow, M. F. Mokbel, and X. Liu, “Spatial cloaking for anonymous
location-based services in mobile peer-to-peer environments,” Geoinfor-
matica, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 351–380, Apr. 2011.

[30] M. S. Bernstein, A. Monroy-Hern´andez, D. Harry, P. Andr´e, K. Panovich,
and G. G. Vargas, “4chan and/b: An analysis of anonymity and
ephemerality in a large online community.” in ICWSM, 2011.

[31] M. McFarland, “Snapchat is thriving and that’s a great sign for your pri-
vacy,” http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/innovations/wp/2013/10/28/
snapchat-is-thriving-and-thats-a-great-sign-for-your-privacy/, Accessed:
Nov 14, 2013.

[32] Y. Lelkes, J. A. Krosnick, D. M. Marx, C. M. Judd, and B. Park,
“Complete anonymity compromises the accuracy of self-reports,” Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1291–1299, 2012.
[33] L. M. Jessup, T. Connolly, and J. Galegher, “The effects of anonymity
on gdss group process with an idea-generating task,” MIS Q., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 313–321, Sep. 1990.

[34] T. Postmes, R. Spears, K. Sakhel, and D. de Groot, “Social inﬂuence in
computer-mediated communication: The effects of anonymity on group
behavior,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, vol. 27, no. 10,
pp. 1243–1254, 2001.

[35] R. Kang, S. Brown, and S. Kiesler, “Why do people seek anonymity
on the internet?: informing policy and design,” in Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI),
2013, pp. 2657–2666.

[36] “Yahoo! Answers,” http://answers.yahoo.com/.
[37] “Quora Policies and Guidelines: Do I have to use my real
policy?”

name
http://www.quora.com/Quora-Policies-and-Guidelines/Do-I-have-
to-use-my-real-name-on-Quora-What-is-Quoras-Real-Names-policy,
Accessed: Nov 5, 2013.

is Quora’s Real Names

on Quora? what

[38] “How many anonymous answers have you posted on Quora,”
https://www.quora.com/Anonymity-on-Quora/How-many-Anonymous-
answers-have-you-posted-on-Quora-And-if-tomorrow-due-to-some-
glitch-those-answers-are-posted-under-your-name-what-would-be-
your-reaction, Accessed: Mar 13, 2014.

[39] “Quora and Search Engines: What does enabling ”Search Engine Privacy”
under Account Settings do?” https://www.quora.com/Quora-and-Search-
Engines/What-does-enabling-Search-Engine-Privacy-under-Account-
Settings-do, Accessed: Nov 5, 2013.

[40] “What drives people to contribute anonymous answers on Quora?”
https://www.quora.com/What-drives-people-to-contribute-anonymous-
answers-on-Quora/, Accessed: Nov 5, 2013.

[41] S. A. Paul, L. Hong, and E. H. Chi, “Who is authoritative? Understanding

reputation mechanisms in Quora,” in Collective Intelligence, 2012.

[42] G. Wang, K. Gill, M. Mohanlal, H. Zheng, and B. Y. Zhao, “Wisdom
in the social crowd: an analysis of Quora,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW), 2013.

508

