2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

Using Frankencerts for Automated Adversarial

Testing of Certiﬁcate Validation
in SSL/TLS Implementations

Chad Brubaker ∗ †

Suman Jana†

Sarfraz Khurshid†

Vitaly Shmatikov†

Baishakhi Ray‡
∗Google

†The University of Texas at Austin
‡University of California, Davis

Abstract—Modern network security rests on the Secure Sock-
ets Layer (SSL) and Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocols.
Distributed systems, mobile and desktop applications, embedded
devices, and all of secure Web rely on SSL/TLS for protection
against network attacks. This protection critically depends on
whether SSL/TLS clients correctly validate X.509 certiﬁcates
presented by servers during the SSL/TLS handshake protocol.

We design, implement, and apply the ﬁrst methodology for
large-scale testing of certiﬁcate validation logic in SSL/TLS
implementations. Our ﬁrst ingredient is “frankencerts,” synthetic
certiﬁcates that are randomly mutated from parts of real cer-
tiﬁcates and thus include unusual combinations of extensions
and constraints. Our second ingredient is differential testing: if
one SSL/TLS implementation accepts a certiﬁcate while another
rejects the same certiﬁcate, we use the discrepancy as an oracle
for ﬁnding ﬂaws in individual implementations.

Differential testing with frankencerts uncovered 208 dis-
crepancies between popular SSL/TLS implementations such as
OpenSSL, NSS, CyaSSL, GnuTLS, PolarSSL, MatrixSSL, etc.
Many of them are caused by serious security vulnerabilities. For
example, any server with a valid X.509 version 1 certiﬁcate can act
as a rogue certiﬁcate authority and issue fake certiﬁcates for any
domain, enabling man-in-the-middle attacks against MatrixSSL
and GnuTLS. Several
implementations also accept certiﬁcate
authorities created by unauthorized issuers, as well as certiﬁcates
not intended for server authentication.

We also found serious vulnerabilities in how users are warned
about certiﬁcate validation errors. When presented with an
expired, self-signed certiﬁcate, NSS, Safari, and Chrome (on
Linux) report that the certiﬁcate has expired—a low-risk, often
ignored error—but not that the connection is insecure against a
man-in-the-middle attack.

These results demonstrate that automated adversarial testing
with frankencerts is a powerful methodology for discovering
security ﬂaws in SSL/TLS implementations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and its descendant Transport
Layer Security (TLS) protocols are the cornerstone of Internet
security. They are the basis of HTTPS and are pervasively
used by Web, mobile, enterprise, and embedded software to
provide end-to-end conﬁdentiality, integrity, and authentication
for communication over insecure networks.

SSL/TLS is a big, complex protocol, described semi-
formally in dozens of RFCs. Implementing it correctly is
a daunting task for an application programmer. Fortunately,

© 2014, Chad Brubaker. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP.2014.15

114

many open-source implementations of SSL/TLS are available
for developers who need to incorporate SSL/TLS into their
software: OpenSSL, NSS, GnuTLS, CyaSSL, PolarSSL, Ma-
trixSSL, cryptlib, and several others. Several Web browsers
include their own, proprietary implementations.

In this paper, we focus on server authentication, which
is the only protection against man-in-the-middle and other
server impersonation attacks, and thus essential for HTTPS
and virtually any other application of SSL/TLS. Server authen-
tication in SSL/TLS depends entirely on a single step in the
handshake protocol. As part of its “Server Hello” message,
the server presents an X.509 certiﬁcate with its public key.
The client must validate this certiﬁcate. Certiﬁcate validation
involves verifying the chain of trust consisting of one or
more certiﬁcate authorities, checking whether the certiﬁcate is
valid for establishing SSL/TLS keys, certiﬁcate validity dates,
various extensions, and many other checks.

Systematically testing correctness of the certiﬁcate val-
idation logic in SSL/TLS implementations is a formidable
challenge. We explain the two main hurdles below.

First problem: generating test inputs. The test inputs, i.e.,
X.509 certiﬁcates, are structurally complex data with intricate
semantic and syntactic constraints. The underlying input space
is huge with only a tiny fraction of the space consisting of
actual certiﬁcates. A simple automated technique, such as
random fuzzing, is unlikely to produce more than a handful of
useful inputs since a random string is overwhelmingly unlikely
to even be parsable as a certiﬁcate.

Some test certiﬁcates can be created manually, but writing
just a small suite of such complex inputs requires considerable
effort; manually creating a high-quality suite is simply infea-
sible. Furthermore, the testing must include “corner cases”:
certiﬁcates with unusual combinations of features and exten-
sions that do not occur in any currently existing certiﬁcate but
may be crafted by an attacker.

Second problem: interpreting the results of testing. Given a
test certiﬁcate and an SSL/TLS implementation, we can record
whether the certiﬁcate has been accepted or rejected, but that
does not answer the main question: is the implementation
correct,
if the
certiﬁcate is rejected, is the reason given for rejection correct?
Manually characterizing test certiﬁcates as valid or invalid

is the accepted certiﬁcate valid? And,

i.e.,

and writing the corresponding assertions for analyzing the
outputs observed during testing does not scale. A naive ap-
proach to automate this characterization essentially requires
re-implementing certiﬁcate validation, which is impractical and
has high potential for bugs of its own. Interpreting the results
of large-scale testing requires an oracle for certiﬁcate validity.

Our contributions. We design, implement, and evaluate the
ﬁrst approach for systematically testing certiﬁcate validation
logic in SSL/TLS implementations. It solves both challenges:
(1) automatically generating test certiﬁcates, and (2) automat-
ically detecting when some of the implementations do not
validate these certiﬁcates correctly.

The ﬁrst step of our approach is adversarial input gen-
eration. By design, our generator synthesizes test certiﬁcates
that are syntactically well-formed but may violate many of the
complex constraints and internal dependencies that a valid cer-
tiﬁcate must satisfy. This enables us to test whether SSL/TLS
implementations check these constraints and dependencies.

To “seed” the generator, we built a corpus of 243,246
real SSL/TLS certiﬁcates by scanning the Internet. Our gen-
erator broke them down into parts, then generated over 8
million frankencerts by mutating random combinations of
these parts and artiﬁcial parts synthesized using the ASN.1
grammar for X.509. By construction, frankencerts are parsable
as certiﬁcates, yet may violate X.509 semantics. They include
unusual combinations of critical and non-critical extensions,
rare extension values, strange key usage constraints, odd
certiﬁcate authorities, etc. Testing SSL/TLS implementations
with frankencerts exercises code paths that rarely get executed
when validating normal certiﬁcates and helps elicit behaviors
that do not manifest during conventional testing.

Our second insight is that multiple, independent imple-
mentations of X.509 certiﬁcate validation—the very same
implementations that we are testing—can be used as an oracle
to detect ﬂaws in validation logic. For each frankencert, we
compare the answers produced by OpenSSL, NSS, GnuTLS,
CyaSSL, PolarSSL, MatrixSSL, OpenJDK, and Bouncy Castle.
These SSL/TLS libraries are supposed to implement the same
certiﬁcate validation algorithm and, therefore, should agree
on every certiﬁcate. Differences in the implementations of
functionality left unspeciﬁed by the X.509 standard may cause
a “benign” discrepancy, but most discrepancies mean that some
of the disagreeing SSL/TLS implementations are incorrect.

Our differential mutation testing of SSL/TLS implementa-
tions on 8,127,600 frankencerts uncovered 208 discrepancies
between the implementations, many of which are caused by
serious ﬂaws. For example, MatrixSSL silently accepts X.509
version 1 certiﬁcates, making all MatrixSSL-based applications
vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks: anyone with a valid
version 1 certiﬁcate can pretend to be an intermediate certiﬁ-
cate authority (CA), issue a fake certiﬁcate for any Internet
domain, and that certiﬁcate will be accepted by MatrixSSL.

In GnuTLS, our testing discovered a subtle bug in the
handling of X.509 version 1 certiﬁcates. Due to a mismatch
between two ﬂags, the code that intends to accept only locally
trusted version 1 root certiﬁcates is actually accepting any
version 1 CA certiﬁcate,
including fake ones from mali-
cious servers. This bug could not have been found without

frankencerts because it is not triggered by any real certiﬁcate
from our corpus (but, of course, a man-in-the-middle attacker
could craft a malicious certiﬁcate to exploit this vulnerability).
Many vulnerabilities are caused by incorrect or missing
checks on the restrictions that root CAs impose on lower-level
CAs. MatrixSSL does not check path length constraints. If
a restricted CA (e.g., a corporate CA whose authority only
extends to a particular enterprise) creates a new intermediate
CA, who then issues certiﬁcates for any Internet domain,
these certiﬁcates will be accepted by MatrixSSL. GnuTLS,
CyaSSL, and PolarSSL do not check key usage constraints. As
a consequence, an attacker who compromises the code signing
key of some company can use it to spoof that company’s
servers in TLS connections. Most of these ﬂaws could not
have been discovered without frankencerts because incorrect
validation logic is only triggered by certiﬁcates of a certain
form, not by “normal” certiﬁcates.

Even if an SSL/TLS implementation correctly rejects a
certiﬁcate,
the reason given to the user is very important
because Web browsers and other interactive applications often
allow the user to override the warning. For example, if the
warning is that
this may
indicate a lazy system administrator but does not imply that
the connection is insecure. Because the risk is low, the user
may click through the warning. If, on the other hand, the
certiﬁcate is not issued by a legitimate certiﬁcate authority,
this means that the server could have been impersonated and
the connection may be insecure.

the certiﬁcate expired yesterday,

Our differential testing uncovered serious vulnerabilities in
how SSL/TLS implementations report errors. When presented
with an expired, self-signed certiﬁcate, NSS reports that the
certiﬁcate has expired but not that the issuer is invalid. This
vulnerability found its way into Web browsers such as Chrome
on Linux and Safari. Since users tend to click through expired-
certiﬁcate warnings—and are advised to do so [1]—this ﬂaw
gives attackers an easily exploitable vector for man-in-the-
middle attacks against all users of these Web browsers.

In summary, adversarial test input generation and differen-
tial mutation testing on millions of “frankencerts” synthesized
from parts of real certiﬁcates is a powerful new technique
for uncovering deep semantic errors in the implementations
of SSL/TLS, the most important network security protocol.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Security of SSL/TLS implementations

We are not aware of any prior work on systematic, auto-
mated discovery of certiﬁcate validation vulnerabilities in the
implementations of SSL/TLS clients.

Moxie Marlinspike demonstrated several ﬂaws in the im-
plementations of SSL/TLS certiﬁcate validation [55, 56, 57],
including the lack of CA bit checking in Microsoft’s Cryp-
toAPI as of 2002 [54]. More recently, the same vulnerability
was discovered in the SSL implementation on Apple iOS [40].
Georgiev et al. carried out a study of certiﬁcate validation
vulnerabilities caused by the incorrect use of SSL/TLS APIs,
as opposed to ﬂaws in the implementations of these APIs [31].
Georgiev et al. focus primarily on the incorrect validation

115

of hostnames in server certiﬁcates at a different level in the
software stack—in applications, transport libraries, and Web-
services middleware. Fahl et al. analyzed incorrect usage of
SSL in Android apps [29]. The class of certiﬁcate validation
vulnerabilities analyzed in this paper is complementary to and
has little overlap with the vulnerabilities discovered in [29, 31].
Unlike [29, 31], we developed an automated technique for
discovering certiﬁcate validation vulnerabilities.

A survey of security issues in SSL/TLS can be found
in [16]. Cryptographic ﬂaws in SSL/TLS implementations
and the protocol itself—including compression, initialization,
padding of cipher modes and message authentication codes,
etc.—can be exploited to attack conﬁdentiality, especially
when the protocol is used for HTTPS (HTTP over SSL) [3,
24, 72]. By contrast, this paper is about authentication ﬂaws.
Flaws in SSL server implementations can be exploited
for chosen-ciphertext attacks, resulting in private key compro-
mise [8, 9]. Flaws in pseudo-random number generation can
produce SSL/TLS keys that are easy to compromise [38, 50].
Hash collisions [77] and certiﬁcate parsing discrepancies
between certiﬁcate authorities (CAs) and Web browsers [44]
can trick a CA into issuing a valid leaf certiﬁcate with the
wrong subject name, or even a rogue intermediate CA cer-
tiﬁcate. By contrast, we focus on verifying whether SSL/TLS
implementations correctly handle invalid certiﬁcates.

Large-scale surveys of SSL certiﬁcates “in the wild” can be
found in [19, 25, 27, 78]. Because their objective is to collect
and analyze certiﬁcates, not to ﬁnd certiﬁcate validation errors
in SSL/TLS implementations, they are complementary to this
paper: for example, their certiﬁcate corpi can be used to “seed”
frankencert generation (Section VII). Delignat-Lavaud et al.
note that GnuTLS ignores unsupported critical extensions [19],
matching what we found with automated testing.

Akhawe et al. surveyed SSL warnings in Web browsers [1].
One of their recommendations is to accept recently expired
certiﬁcates. As we show in Section IX, several Web browsers
show just the “Expired certiﬁcate” warning even if the expired
certiﬁcate is not issued by a trusted CA and the connection is
thus insecure. Akhawe and Felt performed a large-scale user
study of the effectiveness of browser security warnings [2].
One of their ﬁndings is that users are less likely to click
through an “Expired certiﬁcate” warning than through an
“Untrusted issuer” warning, possibly because the former tend
to occur at websites that previously did not produce any
warnings. Amann et al. demonstrated that certain signs of man-
in-the-middle attacks, such as certiﬁcates never seen before for
a given domain or issued by an unusual CA, can be caused
by benign changes in the CA infrastructure [4]. SSL security
indicators in mobile Web browsers were studied in [5, 6].

The focus of this paper is on server certiﬁcate authentica-
tion, which is the most common usage pattern for SSL certiﬁ-
cates. The other direction, i.e., client certiﬁcate authentication,
was analyzed in [21, 60]. Our adversarial testing techniques for
ﬁnding bugs in the client-side validation of server certiﬁcates
can also be applied to the implementations of server-side
validation of client certiﬁcates.

Several recent high-proﬁle vulnerabilities highlighted the
need for thorough security analysis of SSL/TLS implemen-

tations. The implementation of the SSL/TLS handshake in
Mac OS and iOS accidentally did not check whether the key
used to sign the server’s key exchange messages matches the
public key in the certiﬁcate presented by the server, leaving this
implementation vulnerable to server impersonation [49] (this
vulnerability is not caused by incorrect certiﬁcate validation).
In GnuTLS, certain errors during certiﬁcate parsing were
accidentally interpreted as successful validation, thus enabling
server impersonation [33]. We discuss the latter vulnerability
in more detail in Section VIII.

B. Software testing

Our work introduces a novel black-box testing ap-
proach to address two foundational software testing prob-
lems—generation of test inputs and validation of program
outputs (aka the “oracle” problem)—in the context of ﬁnd-
ing security bugs, speciﬁcally in SSL/TLS implementations.
Researchers have extensively studied these two problems
over the last few decades in a number of contexts and de-
veloped various automated techniques to address them. For
example, techniques using grammars [48, 52, 58, 75, 79],
constraints [13, 53], dedicated generators [18], fuzzing [36],
symbolic execution [12, 35, 45, 47, 74], and genetic algo-
rithms [7] provide automated generation of inputs for black-
box and white-box testing, while techniques using correctness
speciﬁcations [15], differential testing [59], and metamorphic
testing [14] provide automated validation of program outputs.
Differential black-box testing has been successfully used to
ﬁnd parsing discrepancies between antivirus tools that can help
malware evade detection [42].

The use of grammars in testing dates back to the
1970s [62] and has provided the basis for randomized [52, 58,
75, 79] and systematic [48] techniques for ﬁnding application
bugs. The most closely related work to ours is Yang et
al.’s Csmith framework, which used random grammar-based
generation of C programs to discover many bugs in production
C compilers [79]. The key difference between Csmith and our
work is input generation. Csmith uses purely grammar-based
generation without actual C programs and hence only produces
input programs with language features that are explicitly
supported by its generation algorithm. Moreover, the design
goal of Csmith is to generate safe programs that have a unique
meaning and no undeﬁned behaviors. This allows Csmith to
use a straightforward test oracle that performs identity compar-
ison on outputs for differential testing. By contrast, our goal is
to explore behaviors of SSL/TLS implementations that are not
exercised by valid certiﬁcates and thus more likely to contain
security bugs. Hence, our test generator does not need to
ensure that test outputs conform to a restricted form. To detect
validation errors, we cluster certiﬁcates into “buckets” based
on the outputs produced by each SSL/TLS implementation
when presented with a given certiﬁcate, with each bucket
representing a discrepancy between the implementations. As
explained in Section IX, multiple discrepancies may be caused
by the same underlying implementation error (in our testing,
15 root causes led to 208 discrepancies).

Clustering test executions is a well-explored area, e.g.,
to diagnose the causes of failed executions by reducing the
number of failures to inspect [32, 41, 43, 61] or to distinguish
failing and passing executions in the context of a single

116

implementation [20]. We use clustering and differential testing
in tandem to identify incorrect behavior in the context of
multiple implementations tested together.

Our test input generator combines parts of existing real
certiﬁcates and also injects synthetic artiﬁcial parts using
operations that resemble combination and mutation in genetic
algorithms [39]. In principle, it may be possible to deﬁne
a genetic algorithm for certiﬁcate generation by customizing
genetic combination and mutation with respect to the SSL
certiﬁcate grammar, ﬁelds, their values, extensions, etc. The
main challenge for effective genetic search is how to deﬁne an
appropriate ﬁtness function, which must measure the potential
usefulness of a candidate input. Genetic search, as well as other
heuristics for test input generation, can complement systematic
exploration using guided sampling [7].

The classic idea of symbolic execution [47] as well as
its more recent variants, e.g., where concrete inputs guide
symbolic execution [12, 35, 74], enable a form of white-box
test input generation that has received much recent attention
for ﬁnding security bugs [36, 37, 46, 73]. Godefroid et
al.’s SAGE [36] introduced white-box fuzzing that executes
a given suite of inputs, monitors their execution paths, and
builds symbolic path condition constraints, which are sys-
tematically negated to explore their neighboring paths. SAGE
found several new bugs in Windows applications, including
media players and image processors. Grammar-based whitebox
fuzzing [34] uses a grammar to enumerate valid string inputs
by solving constraints over symbolic grammar tokens. A
security-focused application using a context-free fragment of
the JavaScript grammar to test the code generation module of
the Internet Explorer 7 JavaScript interpreter showed that the
use of the grammar provides enhanced code coverage. Similar
but independent work on CESE [51] uses symbolic grammars
with symbolic execution to create higher-coverage suites for
select UNIX tools, albeit in a non-security setting.

Kiezun et al.’s Ardilla [46] uses concolic execution to
generate test inputs that drive its dynamic taint analysis and
mutates the inputs using a library of attack patterns to create
SQL injection and cross-site scripting attacks. Halfond et
al. [37] show how symbolic execution can more precisely
identify parameter values that deﬁne the interfaces of Web
applications, and facilitate ﬁnding vulnerabilities. Saxena et
al.’s Kudzu [73] uses a symbolic execution framework based
on a customized string constraint language and solver to ﬁnd
code injection vulnerabilities in JavaScript clients.

Brumley et al. [10] proposed a white-box symbolic analysis
technique to guide differential
testing [59]. Their analysis
is driven by concrete executions in the spirit of dynamic
symbolic (aka concolic) execution [12, 35, 74]. They use
weakest preconditions [23] over select execution paths together
with constraint solving to compute inputs that likely cause
parsing discrepancies between different implementations of
protocols such as HTTP and NTP.

There are two basic differences between our methodology
and that of [10]. First, our black-box approach does not require
analyzing either the source, or the binary code. Second, the
need to solve path constraints limits the scalability of the
approach described in [10]. Generating even a single test
certiﬁcate using their technique requires symbolic analysis of

both the parsing code and the certiﬁcate validation code hidden
deep inside the program. SSL certiﬁcates are structurally more
complex than HTTP and NTP inputs, and, crucially, the certiﬁ-
cate validation logic lies deeper in SSL/TLS implementations
than the X.509 parsing code. For example, a MiniWeb server
responding to a GET /index.html request (one of the case
studies in [10]) executes 246,910 instructions. By contrast, the
simplest of our test cases—an OpenSSL client processing a
certiﬁcate chain of length 1 with zero extensions—executes
27,901,961 instructions.

An interesting avenue for future research is to explore
whether the two approaches could be used in conjunction and,
in particular, whether generation of test SSL certiﬁcates can
beneﬁt from the fact that the technique of [10] performs a
directed search for likely behavioral differences.

More recent work by Ramos and Engler on UC-KLEE [63],
which integrates KLEE [11] and lazy initialization [45], ap-
plies more comprehensive symbolic execution over a bounded
exhaustive execution space to check code equivalence; UC-
KLEE has been effective in ﬁnding bugs in different tools,
including itself. In principle, such goal-directed approaches
are very powerful:
they integrate the spirit of differential
testing with symbolic analysis to create formulas that explic-
itly capture behavioral differences of interest. However, the
resulting formulas in the context of structurally complex data
can be exceedingly complex since they represent destructive
updates in imperative code using a stateless logic. Scaling such
approaches to SSL/TLS implementations is an open problem.
In summary, while approaches based on symbolic execu-
tion have been successful in ﬁnding bugs in many applications,
their central requirement—the need to solve constraints for
each execution path explored in symbolic execution—is the
basic bottleneck that limits their scalability and applicability
for programs that operate on complex data types, such as
the structurally complex SSL certiﬁcates, and have complex
path conditions that can be impractical to solve. By contrast,
our test generation algorithm is not sensitive to the
implementation-level complexity of the programs being
tested. Instead, it focuses on the systematic exploration of
the space of likely useful inputs and thus reduces the overall
problem complexity by de-coupling the complexity of the input
space from that of the SSL/TLS implementations.

Srivastava et al. [76] use static differential analysis, which
to analyze
does not perform test generation or execution,
consistency between different
implementations of the Java
Class Library API and use the discrepancies as an oracle
to ﬁnd ﬂaws in the implementations of access-control logic.
While static analysis and dynamic analysis, such as testing,
are well-known to have complementary strengths, they can also
be applied in synergy [28]. For example, for testing SSL/TLS
implementations, static dataﬂow analysis could potentially
reduce the space of candidate inputs for the test generator by
focusing it to exercise fewer values or fewer combinations of
values for certain certiﬁcate extensions.

III. OVERVIEW OF SSL/TLS

A. SSL/TLS protocol

The Secure Sockets Layers (SSL) Protocol Version 3.0 [70]
and its descendants, Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol

117

Version 1.0 [64], Version 1.1 [67], and Version 1.2 [68], are the
“de facto” standard for secure Internet communications. The
primary goal of the SSL/TLS protocol is to provide privacy
and data integrity between two communicating applications.
In this paper, we focus on a particular security guarantee
promised by SSL/TLS: server authentication. Server authen-
tication is essential for security against network attackers. For
example, when SSL/TLS is used to protect HTTP communi-
cations (HTTPS), server authentication ensures that the client
(e.g., Web browser) is not mistaken about the identity of the
Web server it is connecting to. Without server authentication,
SSL/TLS connections are insecure against man-in-the-middle
attacks, which can be launched by malicious Wi-Fi access
points, compromised routers, etc.

The SSL/TLS protocol comprises the handshake protocol
and the record protocol. Server authentication is performed
entirely in the handshake protocol. As part of the hand-
shake, the server presents an X.509 certiﬁcate with its public
key [69]. The client must validate this certiﬁcate as described
in Section IV. If the certiﬁcate is not validated correctly,
authentication guarantees of SSL/TLS do not hold.

Certiﬁcate validation in SSL/TLS critically depends on
certiﬁcate authorities (CAs). Consequently, we analyze the
correctness of SSL/TLS implementations under the assumption
that the CAs trusted by the client correctly verify the identities
of the servers to whom they issue certiﬁcates. If this assump-
tion does not hold—e.g., a trusted CA has been compromised
or tricked into issuing false certiﬁcates [17, 22]—SSL/TLS is
not secure regardless of whether the client is correct or not.

In summary, we aim to test if the implementations of
SSL/TLS clients correctly authenticate SSL/TLS servers in the
presence of a standard “network attacker,” who can control any
part of the network and run his own servers, possibly with
their own certiﬁcates, but does not control legitimate servers
and cannot forge their certiﬁcates.

B. SSL/TLS implementations

In this paper, we focus primarily on testing open-source
implementations of SSL/TLS. Our testing methodology can be
successfully applied to closed-source implementations, too (as
illustrated by our testing of Web browsers), but having access
to the source code makes it easier to identify the root causes
of the ﬂaws and vulnerabilities uncovered by our testing.

We tested the following SSL/TLS implementations:
OpenSSL, NSS, CyaSSL, GnuTLS, PolarSSL, MatrixSSL,
cryptlib, OpenJDK, and Bouncy Castle. These implementa-
tions are distributed as open-source software libraries so that
they can be incorporated into applications that need SSL/TLS
for secure network communications.

Many vulnerabilities stem from the fact that applications
use these libraries incorrectly [31], especially when some
critical part of SSL/TLS functionality such as verifying the
server’s hostname is delegated by the SSL/TLS library to the
application. In this paper, however, we focus on ﬂaws within
the libraries, not in the applications that use them, with one
exception—Web browsers.

HTTPS, the protocol for protecting Web sessions from
network attackers, is perhaps the most important application of














	








		
























	




















	







		



		



	



	




	



	

	

	

Fig. 1: A sample X509 certiﬁcate chain.

SSL/TLS. Therefore, we extend our testing to Web browsers,
all of which must support HTTPS: Firefox, Chrome, Internet
Explorer, Safari, Opera, and WebKit (the latter is a browser
“engine” rather than a standalone browser). Web browsers
typically contain proprietary implementations of SSL/TLS,
some of which are derived from the libraries listed above.
For example, Firefox and Chrome use a version of NSS, while
WebKit has a GnuTLS-based HTTPS back end, among others.

IV. CERTIFICATE VALIDATION IN SSL/TLS

The only mechanism for server authentication in SSL/TLS
is the client’s validation of the server’s X.509 public-key
certiﬁcate presented during the handshake protocol. Client
authentication is less common (in a typical HTTPS browsing
session, only the server is authenticated). It involves symmetric
steps on the server side to validate the client’s certiﬁcate.

X.509 certiﬁcate validation is an extremely complex pro-
cedure, described in several semi-formal RFCs [64, 65, 66, 67,
68, 69, 70, 71]. Below, we give a very brief, partial overview
of some of the key steps.

Chain of trust veriﬁcation. Each SSL/TLS client trusts a
number of certiﬁcate authorities (CAs), whose X.509 certiﬁ-
cates are stored in the client’s local “root of trust.” We will
refer to these trusted certiﬁcate authorities as root CAs, and
to their certiﬁcates as root certiﬁcates. The list of root CAs
varies from application to application and from OS to OS.
For example, the Firefox Web browser ships with 144 root
certiﬁcates pre-installed, while the Chrome Web browser on
Linux and MacOS relies on the OS’s list of root certiﬁcates.
Each X.509 certiﬁcate has an “issuer” ﬁeld that contains
the name of the certiﬁcate authority (CA) that
issued the
certiﬁcate. The certiﬁcate presented by the server (we’ll call it
the leaf certiﬁcate) should be accompanied by the certiﬁcate
of the issuing CA and, if the issuing CA is not a root CA, the
certiﬁcates of higher-level CAs all the way to a root CA.

118

As part of certiﬁcate validation, the client must construct a
valid chain of certiﬁcates starting from the leaf certiﬁcate and
ending in a root certiﬁcate (see an example in Fig. 1). Below,
we list some of the checks involved in validating the chain.
These brief synopses are very informal and incomplete, please
refer to RFC 5280 [69] for the full explanation.

Each certiﬁcate in the chain must be signed by the CA
immediately above it and the root (“anchor”) of the chain must
be one of the client’s trusted root CAs.

The current time must be later than the value of each
certiﬁcate’s “not valid before” ﬁeld and earlier than the value
of each certiﬁcate’s “not valid after” ﬁeld, in the time zone
speciﬁed in these ﬁelds. If no time zone is speciﬁed, then
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) should be used.

If a CA certiﬁcate in an X.509 version 1 or version 2
certiﬁcate, then the client must either verify that it is indeed
a CA certiﬁcate through out-of-band means or reject
the
certiﬁcate [69, 6.1.4(k)]. The following checks apply only to
X.509 version 3 certiﬁcates.

the basic constraints extension:

For each CA certiﬁcate in the chain, the client must verify
• The “CA bit” must be set. If the CA bit is not set, then
the current certiﬁcate cannot act as a root or intermediate
certiﬁcate in a certiﬁcate chain. The chain is not valid.
• If the CA certiﬁcate contains a “path length” constraint,
the number of intermediate CAs between the leaf certiﬁ-
cate and the current certiﬁcate must be less than the path
length. For example, if the CA certiﬁcate has path length
of 0, it can be used only to issue leaf certiﬁcates.
Every extension in a certiﬁcate is designated as critical
or non-critical. A certiﬁcate with a critical extension that the
client does not recognize or understand must be rejected.

If a CA certiﬁcate in the chain contains a name constraints
extension, then the subject name in the immediately following
certiﬁcate in the chain must satisfy the listed name constraints.
Name constraints are used to limit the subjects that a CA can
issue certiﬁcates for, by listing permitted or excluded subjects.
This extension is critical.

If a certiﬁcate in the chain contains a key usage extension,
the value of this extension must include the purpose that the
certiﬁcate is being used for. For example, the key usage of
an intermediate certiﬁcate must include keyCertSign (it
must also have the CA bit set in the basic constraints, as
described above). If a leaf certiﬁcate contains the server’s
RSA public key that will be used to encrypt a session key,
its key usage extension must include keyEncipherment.
CAs should mark this extension as critical.

Similar to key usage, if a certiﬁcate contains an extended
key usage extension, the value of this extension must include
the purpose that the certiﬁcate is being used for, e.g., server
authentication in the case of a leaf certiﬁcate.

If a certiﬁcate contains an Authority Key Identiﬁer (AKI)
extension, then its value—containing the key identiﬁer and/or
issuer and serial number—should be used to locate the public
key for validating the certiﬁcate. This extension is used when
the certiﬁcate issuer has multiple public keys.

If a certiﬁcate contains a Certiﬁcate Revocation List (CRL)
distribution points extension, the client should obtain CRL
information as speciﬁed by this extension.

The above list omits many important checks and subtleties
of certiﬁcate validation. For example, CA certiﬁcates may
contain policy constraints that limit their authority in various
ways [69, 4.2.1.11]. Policy constraints extension should be
marked as critical, although in practice few SSL/TLS imple-
mentations understand policy constraints.

Hostname veriﬁcation. After the chain of trust has been val-
idated, the client must verify the server’s identity by checking
if the fully qualiﬁed DNS name of the server it wants to talk to
matches one of the names in the “SubjectAltNames” extension
or the “Common Name” ﬁeld of the leaf certiﬁcate. Some SS-
L/TLS implementations perform hostname veriﬁcation, while
others delegate it to higher-level applications (see Table IX).

V. CURRENT TESTING PRACTICES FOR SSL/TLS

IMPLEMENTATIONS

Most SSL/TLS implementations analyzed in this paper
ship with several pre-generated X.509 certiﬁcates intended for
testing (Table I). These certiﬁcates differ only in a few ﬁelds,
such as hashing algorithms (SHA-1, MD5, etc.), algorithms
for public-key cryptography (DSA, RSA, Difﬁe-Hellman, etc.),
and the sizes of public keys (512 bits, 1024 bits, etc.).
OpenSSL uses a total of 2 certiﬁcates to test client and server
authentication, respectively; the rest are intended to test other
functionalities such as certiﬁcate parsing.

TABLE I: Number of SSL/TLS certiﬁcates used by different
implementations for testing

Implementation
NSS
GnuTLS
OpenSSL
PolarSSL
CyaSSL
MatrixSSL

Certiﬁcate count
64
51
44
18
9
9

Testing with a handful of valid certiﬁcates is unlikely to
uncover vulnerabilities, omissions, and implementation ﬂaws
in the certiﬁcate validation logic. For example, we found that
GnuTLS mistakenly accepts all versions 1 certiﬁcates even
though the default ﬂag is set to accept only locally trusted
version 1 root certiﬁcates (see Section IX). This vulnerability
would have never been discovered with their existing test suite
because it only contains version 3 certiﬁcates.

Automated adversarial testing is rarely, if ever, performed
for SSL/TLS implementations. As we demonstrate in this
paper, systematic testing with inputs that do not satisfy the
protocol speciﬁcation signiﬁcantly improves the chances of
uncovering subtle implementation ﬂaws.

Several of the SSL/TLS implementations in our study, in-
cluding OpenSSL, NSS, and MatrixSSL, have been tested and
certiﬁed according to FIPS 140-2 [30], the U.S. government
computer security standard for cryptographic modules. As the
results of our testing demonstrate, FIPS certiﬁcation does not
mean that an implementation performs authentication correctly
or is secure against man-in-the-middle attacks.

119

TABLE II: 20 most common issuers in our corpus

Common Name (CN)
Cybertrust Public SureServer SV CA
Go Daddy Secure Certiﬁcation Authority
localhost.localdomain
GeoTrust SSL CA
COMODO SSL CA
RapidSSL CA
COMODO SSL CA 2
BMS
DigiCert High Assurance CA-3
Hitron Technologies Cable Modem Root Certiﬁcate Authority
VeriSign Class 3 Secure Server CA - G3
COMODO High-Assurance Secure Server CA
PositiveSSL CA 2
Entrust Certiﬁcation Authority - L1C
Daniel
Vodafone (Secure Networks)
192.168.168.168
GeoTrust DV SSL CA
localhost
Parallels Panel

Occurrences
30066
13300
7179
7171
7114
6358
5326
4878
4341
4013
3837
3681
2724
2719
2639
2634
2417
2174
2142
2084

VI. COLLECTING CERTIFICATES

We used ZMap [26] to scan the Internet and attempt an
SSL connection to every host listening on port 443. If the
connection was successful, the certiﬁcate presented by the
server was saved along with the IP of the host.

This scan yielded a corpus of 243,246 unique certiﬁcates.
23.5% of the collected certiﬁcates were already expired at the
time they were presented by their servers, and 0.02% were not
yet valid. The certiﬁcates in our corpus were issued by 33,837
unique issuers, identiﬁed by the value of their CN (“Common
Name”) ﬁeld. Table II shows the 20 most common issuers.

23,698 of the certiﬁcates are X.509 version 1 (v1) cer-
tiﬁcates, 4,974 of which are expired. This is important be-
cause—as our testing has uncovered—any v1 certiﬁcate issued
by a trusted CA can be used for man-in-the-middle attacks
against several SSL/TLS implementations (see Section IX).

20,391 v1 certiﬁcates are self-signed. Table III shows
the 10 most common issuers of the other 3,307 certiﬁcates.
localhost,
localdomain, and 192.168.1.1 are all self-issued
certiﬁcate chains, but many v1 certiﬁcates have been issued by
trusted issuers, especially manufacturers of embedded devices.
For example, Remotewd.com is used for remote control of
Western Digital Smart TVs, while UBNT and ZTE make
networking equipment. As we show in Section IX, SSL/TLS
implementations that speciﬁcally target embedded devices han-
dle v1 certiﬁcates incorrectly and are thus vulnerable to man-
in-the-middle attacks using these certiﬁcates.

437 certiﬁcates in our corpus have version 4, even though
there is no X.509 version 4. 434 of them are self-signed, the
other 3 are issued by Cyberoam, a manufacturer of hardware
“security appliances.” We conjecture that the cause is an off-
by-one bug in the certiﬁcate issuance software: the version ﬁeld
in the certiﬁcate is zero-indexed, and if set to 3 by the issuer,
it is interpreted as version 4 by SSL/TLS implementations.

Table IV shows the number of times various extensions
show up in our corpus and how many unique values we
observed for each extension. Extensions are labeled by short
names if known, otherwise by their object identiﬁers (OID).

120

TABLE III: 10 most common issuers of X.509 version 1
certiﬁcates

Common Name (CN)
BMS
Parallels Panel
localhost
brutus.neuronio.pt
plesk
remotewd.com
UBNT
localdomain
192.168.1.1
ZTE Corporation

Occurrences
4877
2003
1668
1196
1163
1120
1094
986
507
501

TABLE IV: Extensions observed in our corpus

Name or OID
basicConstraints
authorityKeyIdentiﬁer
subjectKeyIdentiﬁer
keyUsage
extendedKeyUsage
crlDistributionPoints
subjectAltName
authorityInfoAccess
certiﬁcatePolicies
nsCertType
nsComment
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.20.2
issuerAltName
1.3.6.1.5.5.7.1.12
SMIME-CAPS
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.21.10
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.21.7
privateKeyUsagePeriod
2.5.29.1
nsRevocationUrl
nsCaRevocationUrl
nsCaPolicyUrl
nsSslServerName
nsBaseUrl
1.2.840.113533.7.65.0
2.16.840.1.113719.1.9.4.1
nsRenewalUrl
2.5.29.80
qcStatements
2.5.29.7
2.16.840.1.113733.1.6.15
2.5.29.10
1.3.6.1.4.1.3401.8.1.1
freshestCRL
subjectDirectoryAttributes
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.11.11
2.5.29.3
2.16.840.1.113733.1.6.7
1.3.6.1.4.4324.33
1.3.6.1.4.4324.36
1.3.6.1.4.4324.34
1.3.6.1.4.4324.35
1.2.40.0.10.1.1.1
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.21.1
1.3.6.1.4.1.7650.1
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.11.87
1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.11.26
1.3.6.1.4.1.8173.2.3.6
1.2.40.0.10.1.1.2
2.5.29.4
1.2.250.1.71.1.2.5
1.3.6.1.4.1.6334.2.2

Occurrences
161723
161572
151823
132970
131453
126579
101622
89005
81264
63913
5870
2897
1519
1474
915
875
873
871
175
112
104
74
73
63
59
54
33
10
8
7
6
5
4
4
4
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Unique values
13
21990
72496
54
83
4851
59767
3864
418
21
185
11
115
2
4
16
312
798
133
39
52
32
17
31
6
26
7
10
2
7
6
1
4
3
2
3
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

VII. GENERATING FRANKENCERTS

The key challenge in generating test inputs for SSL/TLS
implementations is how to create strings that (1) are parsed
as X.509 certiﬁcates by the implementations, but (2) exercise
parts of their functionality that are rarely or never executed
when processing normal certiﬁcates.

We use our corpus of real certiﬁcates (see Section VI) as
the source of syntactically valid certiﬁcate parts. Our algorithm
them assembles these parts into random combinations we
call
frankencerts. One limitation of the certiﬁcates in our
corpus is that they all conform to the X.509 speciﬁcation. To
test how SSL/TLS implementations behave when faced with
syntactically valid certiﬁcates that do not conform to X.509,
we also synthesize artiﬁcial certiﬁcate parts and add them to
the inputs of the frankencerts generator (see Section VII-B).

A. Generating frankencerts
Algorithm 1 describes

a

the generation of

single
frankencert. Our prototype implementation of Frankencert
is based on OpenSSL. It uses parts randomly selected from
the corpus, with two exceptions: it generates a new RSA key
and changes the issuer so that it can create chains where the
generated frankencert acts as an intermediate certiﬁcate. The
issuer ﬁeld of each frankencert must be equal to the subject of
the certiﬁcate one level higher in the chain, or else all tested
implementations fail to follow the chain and do not attempt
to validate any other part of the certiﬁcate. For every other
ﬁeld, the generator picks the value from a randomly chosen
certiﬁcate in the corpus (a different certiﬁcate for each ﬁeld).
Extensions are set as follows. The generator chooses a
random number of extensions from among all extensions
observed in the corpus (Table IV). For each extension,
it
randomly chooses a value from the set of all observed values
for that extension. Each value, no matter how common or rare,
has an equal probability of appearing in a frankencert.

We use two CAs as roots of trust, with an X.509 version 1
certiﬁcate and an X.509 version 3 certiﬁcate, respectively. For
the purposes of testing, both root CAs are installed in the local
root of trust and thus trusted by all tested SSL/TLS clients.

Each frankencert is a well-formed X.509 certiﬁcate signed
by a locally trusted CA, but it may be invalid for a number of
reasons. By design, the frankencert generator does not respect
the constraints on X.509 extensions. It also randomly desig-
nates extensions as critical or non-critical in each generated
frankencert, violating the requirement that certain extensions
must be critical (Section IV). This allows us to test whether
SSL/TLS implementations reject certiﬁcates with unknown
critical extensions, as required by the X.509 RFC [69].

For certiﬁcate chains, we use between 0 and 3 frankencerts.
Each intermediate certiﬁcate uses the previous certiﬁcate’s
(randomly chosen) subject as its issuer and is signed by the
previous certiﬁcate, creating a chain that SSL/TLS implemen-
tations can follow. These chains are well-formed, but may
still be invalid because of the contents of random frankencerts
acting as intermediate certiﬁcates. For example, the key us-
age extension of an intermediate certiﬁcate may not include
keyCertSign, as required by the X.509 RFC [69], or an

121

intermediate certiﬁcate may violate a name constraint which
limits the set of subjects it is allowed to certify.

else

end if

if f ield =“key” then

new cert ← Create a blank cert
for all f ield ∈ new cert do

new cert.key ← Create a random key
else if f ield =“issuer” then
new cert.issuer ← issuer
random cert ← CHOICE(certs)
new cert.f ield ← random cert.f ield

Algorithm 1 Generating a single frankencert
1: procedure FRANKENCERT(certs, exts, issuer)
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25: end procedure

random id ←CHOICE(exts)
random val ←CHOICE(exts[random id])
new cert.extensions[i].id ← random id
new cert.extensions[i].val ← random val
if RANDOM < 0.05 then
FLIP( new cert.extensions[i].critical)

end for
num exts ←RANDOM(0, 10)
for i ∈ 1..num exts do

end for
SIGN(new cert, issuer.key)
return new cert

end if

issuer ← ca
chain ← ∅
exts ←GETEXTENSIONS(certs)
for i ∈ 1..length do
chain[i] ←FRANKENCERT(certs, exts, issuer)
issuer ← chain[i]

Algorithm 2 Generating a chain of frankencerts
1: procedure FRANKENCHAIN(certs, ca, length)
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10: end procedure

end for
return chain

B. Generating synthetic mutations

as

in the

frankencert

The purpose of synthetic certiﬁcate parts is to test how
SSL/TLS implementations react to extension values that follow
the ASN.1 grammar for X.509 but do not conform to the X.509
speciﬁcation.
Taking a

input, we ﬁrst parse
all
certiﬁcate using OpenSSL.
extensions present
The critical bit and the rest of
the extension value
are extracted using X509 EXTENSION get critical() and
X509 EXTENSION get data(), respectively. Then, for each
of these extensions, the extension value is replaced with a
randomly generated ASN.1 string and a null character (0)
is probabilistically injected into this string. Because most of
the SSL/TLS implementations in our testing are written in
C, and C strings are terminated by a null character, this step
helps verify whether implementations parse extension values

uniq exts ← ∅
for all cert ∈ certs do

for all ext ∈ cert.extensions do

Algorithm 3 Extracting unique extensions from a corpus of
certiﬁcates
1: procedure GETEXTENSIONS(certs)
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16: end procedure

id ← ext.id
val ← ext.val
if id /∈ uniq exts then
uniq exts[id] ← ∅
end if
if val /∈ uniq exts[id] then
end if

uniq exts[id] ← uniq exts[id] ∪ val

end for

end for
return uniq exts

correctly. Finally, the extension is randomly marked as critical
or non-critical.

VIII. TESTING SSL/TLS IMPLEMENTATIONS

We tested open-source SSL/TLS libraries and several Web
browsers. The tested libraries are OpenSSL 1.0.1e, PolarSSL
1.2.8, GnuTLS 3.1.9.1, CyaSSL 2.7.0, MatrixSSL 3.4.2, NSS
3.15.2, cryptlib 3.4.0-r1, OpenJDK 1.7.0 09-b30, and Bouncy
Castle 1.49. The tested browsers are Firefox 20.0, Chrome
30.0.1599.114 p1, WebKitGTK 1.10.2-r300, Opera 12.0, Sa-
fari 7.0, and IE 10.0.

Testing was done in parallel on 3 machines: an Ubuntu
Linux machine with two Intel Xeon E5420 (2.5Ghz) CPUs
and 16 GB of RAM, an Ubuntu Linux machine with an Intel
i7-2600K (4.0Ghz) CPU and 16GB of RAM, and a Gentoo
Linux machine with an Intel i5-3360M (2.8Ghz) CPU with
8GB of RAM. Each machine generated and tested frankencerts
independently, with the results merged later. The average speed
of generating a frankencert chain with 3 certiﬁcates is 11.7ms.

SSL/TLS clients. We implemented a simple client for each
SSL/TLS library. Each client takes three arguments (host, port,
path to the ﬁle with trusted root certiﬁcates) and makes an
SSL 3.0 connection to the host/port. The server presents a
frankencert. The client records the answer reported by the
library, including error codes if any. When implementing these
clients, we used the documentation provided by the libraries
and followed the sample code in the documentation as closely
as possible. We expect that most application developers using
the library would follow the same procedure.

For testing Web browsers, we created scripts with the
same input/output format as our clients for the libraries, al-
lowing straightforward integration of browsers into our testing
framework. For Firefox, we used Xulrunner to make an SSL
connection and print the output without bringing up a Firefox
window. For Chrome, we could not ﬁnd an easy way to avoid
launching the window. Therefore, we used a JavaScript ﬁle to
make the connection and record the results.

Each execution of a library client takes between 0.04 and
0.10 seconds, with OpenSSL being the fastest and PolarSSL

122

the slowest. The browser scripts are much slower: 0.6-1.0
seconds for Firefox and 1.1-1.4 seconds for Chrome.

Differential testing. For differential testing of multiple SS-
L/TLS implementations, we implemented a Python script that
generates frankencerts and executes all clients against each
frankencert. The entire script is 367 lines of code, including
102 lines for certiﬁcate generation and 163 lines for parallel
execution of clients. Certiﬁcates are generated in batches of
200; executing all clients on a single batch takes 25 seconds.
If a certiﬁcate causes disagreement between the clients (i.e.,
the clients produce different error codes when presented with
this certiﬁcate), the certiﬁcate is indexed by its SHA-1 hash
and stored into the appropriate bucket. Buckets are deﬁned by
the tuples of error codes returned by each client. For example,
if client A accepts the certiﬁcate, client B rejects it with error
code 34, and client C rejects it with error code 1, the certiﬁcate
is stored into the 0-34-1 bucket. The size of each bucket is
capped at 512 certiﬁcates.

In total, we tested our clients on 8,127,600 frankencerts.
It
is not computationally feasible to exhaustively generate
certiﬁcates with all possible combinations of extension values
from Table IV, but every value of every extension appeared in
at least one of the frankencerts used in the testing.

Our

testing yielded 208 distinct discrepancies be-
tween SSL/TLS implementations, with a total of 62,022
frankencerts triggering these discrepancies.

Analysis of the results. All SSL/TLS implementations we
tested are supposed to implement the same protocol and, in par-
ticular, exactly the same certiﬁcate validation logic. Whenever
one implementation accepts a certiﬁcate and another rejects the
same certiﬁcate, their implementations of the X.509 standard
must be semantically different. In other words, differential
testing has no false positives. This is very important when
testing on over 8 million inputs, because any non-negligible
false-positive rate would have resulted in an overwhelming
number of false positives.

While all discrepancies found by differential testing indi-
cate genuine differences between implementations, not every
difference implies a security vulnerability. For each discrep-
ancy, we manually analyzed the source code of the disagreeing
implementations to identify the root cause of the disagreement
and ﬁnd the ﬂaw (if any) in the certiﬁcate validation logic of
one or more implementations. Because some parts of the X.509
standard are left to the discretion of the implementation, a few
of the discrepancies turned out to be benign. For example,
the differing treatments of the Authority Key Identiﬁer (AKI)
extension (Section IX-E) fall into this category.

Differential testing with frankencerts suffers from false
negatives and can miss security ﬂaws. SSL/TLS implemen-
tations may contain code paths that are not exercised by a
given set of frankencerts. An example of this is the recently
discovered certiﬁcate validation bug in GnuTLS [33], which is
only triggered by syntactically malformed certiﬁcates. It was
not found by our testing because all frankencerts we generated
comply with the X.509 grammar. Similarly, frankencerts will
not trigger ﬂaws on the code paths responsible for processing
extensions that do not occur in the certiﬁcate corpus from

which these frankencerts are constructed, or the paths executed
only for certain versions and modes of SSL/TLS, etc.

Further, if all implementations make the same mistake, it
will not manifest as a discrepancy. Finally, an implementation
may reject an invalid certiﬁcate for the wrong reason(s). To
reduce false negatives in the latter case, we also analyzed the
discrepancies between the reported validation errors.

Analysis of error reporting. Proper error reporting is critical
for SSL/TLS implementations because a trivial, low-risk warn-
ing (e.g., expired certiﬁcate) may accidentally hide or mask a
severe problem (e.g., invalid certiﬁcate issuer).

Not every SSL/TLS implementation produces ﬁne-grained
error codes
that are easy to translate into a human-
understandable reason for rejection. Many simply reject the
certiﬁcate and return a generic error. If the certiﬁcate is invalid
for multiple reasons, all libraries except GnuTLS return only
one error value, but some allow the application to extract more
error codes through additional function calls. This is fraught
with peril because the application may forget to make these
additional calls and thus allow a less severe error to mask a
serious problem with the certiﬁcate.

Therefore, we limited our differential

testing of error
reporting to Web browsers, OpenSSL, NSS, GnuTLS, and
OpenJDK. For this testing, each output was mapped to one of
the following reasons: “Accepted,” “Invalid issuer,” “Expired,”
“Not yet valid,” and “Unknown or invalid critical extension.”
For Web browsers, we also included “Hostname in the certiﬁ-
cate does not match the server.”

IX. RESULTS

Depending on the

combination of mutations

in a
frankencert, the same ﬂaw in a given implementation of X.509
certiﬁcate validation can produce different results. We analyzed
208 discrepancies between the implementations found by our
testing and attributed them to 15 distinct root causes.

Table V summarizes the results. As the second column
shows, most of the issues could not have been discovered
without frankencerts because the certiﬁcates triggering these
issues do not exist in our corpus (but, of course, can be crafted
by the adversary to exploit the corresponding ﬂaw).

A. Incorrect checking of basic constraints

Basic constraints, described in Section IV, are an essential
part of CA certiﬁcates. Every X.509 version 3 CA certiﬁcate
must have the CA bit set, otherwise any domain with a
valid leaf certiﬁcate could act as a rogue CA and issue fake
certiﬁcates for other domains.

Untrusted version 1 intermediate certiﬁcate. Before version
3, X.509 certiﬁcates did not have basic constraints, making it
impossible to check whether a certiﬁcate in the chain belongs
to a valid CA except via out-of-band means. If an SSL/TLS
implementation encounters a version 1 (v1) CA certiﬁcate that
cannot be validated out of band, it must reject it [69, 6.1.4(k)].
Both MatrixSSL and GnuTLS accept chains containing
v1 certiﬁcates. As we explain below,
this can make any
application based on MatrixSSL or GnuTLS vulnerable to

man-in-the-middle attacks. In MatrixSSL, the following code
silently skips the basic constraints check for any certiﬁcate
whose version ﬁeld is 0 or 1 (encoding X.509 version 1 or 2,
respectively, because the version ﬁeld is zero-indexed):

/* Certificate authority constraint only available in

version 3 certs */

if ((ic->version > 1) && (ic->extensions.bc.ca<= 0)) {

psTraceCrypto("Issuer does not have basicConstraint

CA permissions\n");

sc->authStatus = PS_CERT_AUTH_FAIL_BC;
return PS_CERT_AUTH_FAIL_BC;

}

GnuTLS, on the other hand, contains a very subtle error.
This error could not have been uncovered without frankencerts
because none of the real certiﬁcate chains in our corpus contain
v1 intermediate certiﬁcates.

GnuTLS has three ﬂags that an application can set
to customize the library’s
treatment of v1 CA certiﬁ-
cates: GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT (only accept v1
root certiﬁcates), GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_ANY_X509_V1_CA_CRT (ac-
cept v1 certiﬁcates for root and intermediate CAs), and
GNUTLS_VERIFY_DO_NOT_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT (reject all v1 CA
certiﬁcates). Only GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT is set by
default. The intention is good: the application may locally trust
a v1 root CA, but, to prevent other customers of that root CA
from acting as CAs themselves, no v1 intermediate certiﬁcates
should be accepted.

The relevant part of GnuTLS certiﬁcate validation code
is shown below (adapted from lib/x509/verify.c). After a
root v1 certiﬁcate has been accepted, GnuTLS needs to
prevent any further v1 certiﬁcates from being accepted. To
this end, it clears the GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT ﬂag
on line 12 before calling _gnutls_verify_certificate2. The
latter function accepts v1 certiﬁcates unless a different ﬂag,
GNUTLS_VERIFY_DO_NOT_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT is set (line 25).

unsigned int _gnutls_x509_verify_certificate(...)
{

...

/* verify the certificate path (chain) */
for (i = clist_size - 1; i > 0; i--)
{

/* note that here we disable this V1 CA flag. So

that no version 1

* certificates can exist in a supplied chain.
*/
if (!(flags &

GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_ANY_X509_V1_CA_CRT))

flags &= ˜(GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT);

if ((ret = _gnutls_verify_certificate2 (...)) ==

0)

/* return error */

{

}

}
...

}

int _gnutls_verify_certificate2(...)
{

...
if (!(flags & GNUTLS_VERIFY_DISABLE_CA_SIGN) &&

((flags &

GNUTLS_VERIFY_DO_NOT_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT)

|| issuer_version != 1))

{

if (check_if_ca (cert, issuer, flags) == 0)

{

/*return error*/
...

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9
10
11

12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

26
27
28
29
30
31

123

TABLE V: Semantic discrepancies in certiﬁcate validation (incorrect answers in bold)

Problem

Untrusted version 1 intermediate CA
certiﬁcate
Untrusted version 2 intermediate CA
certiﬁcate

Version 1 certiﬁcate with valid basic
constraints
Intermediate CA not authorized to is-
sue further intermediate CA certiﬁ-
cates, but followed in the chain by an
intermediate CA certiﬁcate
. . . followed by a leaf CA certiﬁcate
Intermediate CA not authorized to is-
sue certiﬁcates for server’s hostname
Certiﬁcate not yet valid
Certiﬁcate expired in its timezone
CA certiﬁcate not authorized for sign-
ing other certiﬁcates
Server certiﬁcate not authorized for
use in SSL/TLS handshake
Server certiﬁcate not authorized for
server authentication
Certiﬁcate with unknown critical ex-
tension
Certiﬁcate with malformed extension
value
Certiﬁcate with the same issuer and
subject and a valid chain of trust
Issuer name does not match AKI
Issuer serial number does not match
AKI

Certiﬁcates
triggering
the problem
occur
in
the original
corpus
No

No

No

No

No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No
No

OpenSSL

PolarSSL

GnuTLS

CyaSSL MatrixSSL

NSS

OpenJDK,
Bouncy
Castle

Browsers

reject

reject

accept

reject

reject
reject

reject
reject
reject

reject

reject

reject

accept

reject

reject
reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject
reject

accept
accept
reject

accept

accept

reject

reject

reject

accept
accept

accept

reject

reject

reject

accept

accept

reject

reject

accept
accept

reject
reject
accept

accept

accept

accept

accept

accept

accept
reject

reject
accept

reject
reject
accept

accept

accept

accept

accept

reject

accept
accept

accept

accept

accept

accept

accept
accept

reject
accept
accept

accept

accept

accept

accept

accept

accept
accept

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject
reject

reject
reject
reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject
reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject
reject

reject
reject
reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject
reject

reject

reject

Firefox: reject
Opera, Chrome: accept

reject

reject
reject

reject
reject
reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject

reject
reject

32
33
34
35
36

}

}

}
/*perform other checks*/
...

There is an interesting dependency between the two
ﬂags. To prevent intermediate v1 certiﬁcates from being ac-
cepted, GNUTLS_VERIFY_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT must be false and
GNUTLS_VERIFY_DO_NOT_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT must be true. The
calling function sets the former, but not the latter. Therefore,
although by default GnuTLS is only intended to accept root
v1 certiﬁcates, in reality it accepts any v1 certiﬁcate.

The consequences of this bug are not subtle. If an ap-
plication based on GnuTLS trusts a v1 root CA certiﬁcate,
then any server certiﬁed by the same root can act as a
rogue CA, issuing fake certiﬁcates for any Internet domain
and launching man-in-the-middle attacks against this GnuTLS-
based application. Unfortunately, trusting v1 root certiﬁcates is
very common. For example, Gentoo Linux by default has 13 v1
root CA certiﬁcates, Mozilla has 9, and we observed thousands
of CA-issued v1 leaf certiﬁcates “in the wild” (Section VI).

Untrusted version 2 intermediate certiﬁcate. We never
observed X.509 version 2 certiﬁcates “in the wild,” but, for
the purposes of testing, did generate version 2 frankencerts.

As explained above, MatrixSSL silently accepts all CA
certiﬁcates whose version ﬁeld is less than 2 (i.e., version
number less than 3). In GnuTLS, gnutls_x509_crt_get_version

returns the actual version, not
following check blocks version 2 certiﬁcates:

the version ﬁeld, and the

issuer_version = gnutls_x509_crt_get_version (issuer);
// ...

if (!(flags & GNUTLS_VERIFY_DISABLE_CA_SIGN) &&

((flags &

GNUTLS_VERIFY_DO_NOT_ALLOW_X509_V1_CA_CRT)

|| issuer_version != 1))

{

}

// ...

Version 1 certiﬁcate with valid basic constraints. Basic
constraints were added only in X.509 version 3, but several
SSL/TLS implementations always verify basic constraints if
present in the certiﬁcate regardless of its version ﬁeld.

Some of our frankencert chains include version 1 interme-
diate certiﬁcates with correct basic constraints (obviously, such
certiﬁcates do not exist “in the wild”). OpenSSL, GnuTLS,
MatrixSSL, CyaSSL, Opera, and Chrome accept them, Open-
JDK and Bouncy Castle reject them, NSS and Firefox fail with
a generic Security library failure error. Neither choice appears
to lead to a security vulnerability.

Intermediate CA not authorized to issue further intermediate
CA certiﬁcates. When a higher-level CA certiﬁes a lower-
level CA, it can impose various restrictions on the latter. For
example, it can limit the number of intermediate certiﬁcates
that may follow the lower-level CA’s certiﬁcate in a certiﬁcate

124

chain. This is done by setting the pathLenConstraint ﬁeld in the
basic constraints extension of the lower-level CA’s certiﬁcate.
For example, if path length is set to zero, then the lower-
level CA is authorized to issue only leaf certiﬁcates, but not
intermediate CA certiﬁcates. This is good security practice: a
CA delegates its authority to a lower-level CA, but prevents
the latter from delegating it any further. We observed 17 CA
certiﬁcates with path length constraints in our corpus.

MatrixSSL ignores path length constraints. This can be
exploited by a malicious or compromised CA to evade restric-
tions imposed by a higher-level CA. For example, suppose
that a trusted root CA authorized a lower-level CA—call it
EnterpriseCA—but prohibited it from creating other CAs (via
path length constraints) and from issuing certiﬁcates for any
domain other than enterprise.com (via name constraints—see
Section IX-B). This provides a degree of protection if Enter-
priseCA is compromised. If the attacker uses EnterpriseCA to
issue a certiﬁcate for, say, google.com, this certiﬁcate should
be rejected by any SSL/TLS implementation because it violates
the constraints expressed in EnterpriseCA’s own certiﬁcate.

This attack will succeed, however, against any application
based on MatrixSSL. The impact of this vulnerability may be
ampliﬁed by the fact that MatrixSSL targets embedded devices,
whose manufacturers are the kind of organizations that are
likely to obtain CA certiﬁcates with restricted authority.

There is an interesting discrepancy in how the implemen-
tations react when an intermediate CA whose path length is
zero is followed by a leaf certiﬁcate that also happens to be a
CA certiﬁcate. In our testing, only MatrixSSL and GnuTLS ac-
cepted this chain. All other SSL/TLS implementations rejected
it because they do not allow any CA certiﬁcate to follow an
intermediate CA whose path length is zero. This interpretation
is incorrect. The X.509 standard explicitly permits a leaf CA
certiﬁcate to follow an intermediate CA whose path length is
zero [69, Section 4.2.1.9], but only GnuTLS implements this
part of the standard correctly.

B. Incorrect checking of name constraints

The higher-level CA may restrict the ability of a lower-
level CA to issue certiﬁcates for arbitrary domains by including
a name constraint in the lower-level’s CA’s certiﬁcate. For
example, if the issuing CA wants to allow the lower-level CA
to certify only the subdomains of foo.com, it can add a name
constraint *.foo.com to the lower-level CA’s certiﬁcate.

GnuTLS, MatrixSSL, and CyaSSL ignore name constraints
and accept the server’s certiﬁcate even if it has been issued by
a CA that is not authorized to issue certiﬁcates for that server.

C. Incorrect checking of time

Every X.509 certiﬁcate has the notBefore and notAfter
timestamp ﬁelds. The SSL/TLS client must verify that the
current date and time in GMT (or the time zone speciﬁed in
these ﬁelds) is within the range of these timestamps.

PolarSSL ignores the notBefore timestamp and thus accepts
certiﬁcates that are not yet valid. When verifying the notAfter
ﬁeld, it uses local time instead of GMT or the time zone
speciﬁed in the ﬁeld.

MatrixSSL does not perform any time checks of its own
and delegates this responsibility to the applications. The sam-
ple application code included with MatrixSSL checks the day,
but not the hours and minutes of the notAfter ﬁeld, and uses
local time, not GMT or the time zone speciﬁed in the ﬁeld.

D. Incorrect checking of key usage

SSL/TLS clients must check the key usage and, if present,
extended key usage extensions to verify that the certiﬁcates
are authorized for their purpose. Leaf certiﬁcates must be
authorized for key encipherment or key agreement, while CA
certiﬁcates must be authorized to sign other certiﬁcates.

CA certiﬁcate not authorized for signing other certiﬁcates.
All CA certiﬁcates in the chain must include keyCertSign
in their key usage. GnuTLS, CyaSSL, and MatrixSSL do
not check the key usage extension in CA certiﬁcates. An
attacker who compromises any CA key, even a key that is
not intended or used for certiﬁcate issuance, can use it to
forge certiﬁcates and launch man-in-the-middle attacks against
applications based on these libraries.

Server certiﬁcate not authorized for use in SSL/TLS hand-
shake. PolarSSL, GnuTLS, CyaSSL, and MatrixSSL do not
check the key usage extension in leaf certiﬁcates. This is
a serious security vulnerability. For example, if an attacker
compromises some company’s code signing certiﬁcate, which
is only intended for authenticating code, he will be able
to impersonate that company’s network and Web servers to
any application based on the above SSL/TLS libraries, vastly
increasing the impact of the attack.

Server certiﬁcate not authorized for server authentication.
PolarSSL, gnuTLS, CyaSSL and MatrixSSL do not check the
extended key usage extension. Given a certiﬁcate with key
usage that allows all operations and extended key usage that
only allows it to be used for TLS client authentication (or any
purpose other than server authentication), these libraries accept
the certiﬁcate for server authentication.

E. Other discrepancies in extension checks

Unknown critical extensions. If an SSL/TLS implementation
does not recognize an extension that is marked as critical, it
must reject the certiﬁcate. GnuTLS, CyaSSL, and MatrixSSL
accept certiﬁcates with unknown critical extensions.

Malformed extension values. Given a certiﬁcate with a known
non-critical extension whose value is syntactically well-formed
ASN.1 but not a valid value for that extension, OpenSSL,
GnuTLS, CyaSSL, and MatrixSSL accept it, while the other
libraries and all browsers reject it.

Inconsistencies in the deﬁnition of self-signed. Self-issued
certiﬁcates are CA certiﬁcates in which the issuer and subject
are the same entity [69]. Nevertheless, given a (very odd)
certiﬁcate whose subject is the same as issuer but that also
has a valid chain of trust, GnuTLS and MatrixSSL accept it.

Inconsistencies between the certiﬁcate’s Authority Key Iden-
tiﬁer and its issuer. The Authority Key Identiﬁer (AKI)
extension differentiates between multiple certiﬁcates of the

125

same issuer. When an AKI is present in a certiﬁcate issued
by CA whose name is A, but the AKI points to a certiﬁcate
whose subject name is B, some libraries reject, others accept.

I is the most severe error. It implies that the connection is
insecure and must be reported to the user. On the other hand,
E is a common, relatively low-risk error.

If the serial number ﬁeld is absent

then
GnuTLS accepts. But if this ﬁeld is present and does not match
the issuer’s serial number, then GnuTLS rejects.

in the AKI,

F. “Users. . . don’t go for the commercial CA racket”

We planned to include cryptlib in our testing, but then
discovered that it does not verify certiﬁcate chains. We let the
following code snippet, taken from session/ssl_cli.c, speak
for itself (there is no code inside the if block):

the

/* If certificate verification hasn’t been disabled

, make sure that

server’s certificate verifies */

if( !( verifyFlags & SSL_PFLAG_DISABLE_CERTVERIFY )

)

{
/* This is still too risky to enable by default

because most users outside of web browsing
don’t go for the commercial CA racket */

}

return( CRYPT_OK );

G. Security problems in error reporting

Rejection of an invalid certiﬁcate is not the end of the
story. Web browsers and other interactive applications generate
a warning based on the reason for rejection, show this warning
to the user, and, in many cases, allow the user to override the
dialog and proceed.

Different errors have different security implications. A re-
cently expired, but otherwise valid certiﬁcate may be evidence
of a sloppy system administrator who forgot to install a new
certiﬁcate, but does not imply that the SSL/TLS connection
will be insecure. “Expired certiﬁcate” warnings are sufﬁciently
common that users have learned to ignore them and browser
developers are even advised to suppress them [1].

If, on the other hand, the certiﬁcate issuer is not valid, this
means that the server cannot be authenticated and the con-
nection is not secure against man-in-the-middle attacks. If the
server’s hostname does not match the subject of the certiﬁcate,
the user may inspect both names and decide whether to proceed
or not. For example, if the hostname (e.g., bar.foo.com) is
a subdomain of the common name in the certiﬁcate (e.g.,
foo.com), the user may chalk the discrepancy up to a minor
misconﬁguration and proceed.

To test whether SSL/TLS implementations report certiﬁcate
testing on leaf

errors correctly, we performed differential
certiﬁcates with all combinations of the following:

timestamp in the certiﬁcate.

• Expired (E): Current
time is later than the notAfter
• Bad issuer (I): There is no valid chain of trust from the
• Bad name (N): Neither the common name, nor the sub-
ject alternative name in the certiﬁcate match the server’s
hostname.

certiﬁcate’s issuer to a trusted root CA.

126

Table VI shows the results. For these tests, we extended
our client suite with common Web browsers, since they are
directly responsible for interpreting the reasons for certiﬁcate
rejection and presenting error warnings to human users.

Most SSL/TLS implementations and Web browsers return
only one error code even if the certiﬁcate is invalid for multiple
reasons. What is especially worrisome is that some browsers
choose to report the less severe reason. In effect, they hide a
severe security problem under a low-risk warning. These
cases are highlighted in bold in Table VI.

For example, if a network attacker—say, a malicious Wi-
Fi access point—presents a self-signed, very recently expired
certiﬁcate for gmail.com or any other important domain to
a user of Safari 7 or Chrome 30 (on Linux), the only error
warning the user will see is “Expired certiﬁcate.” 1 Many
users will click through this low-risk warning—even though
authentication has failed and the server has been spoofed!
This vulnerability is generic in all NSS-based applications:
if the certiﬁcate is expired, that’s the only reported error code
regardless of any other problems with the certiﬁcate.

A related problem (not reﬂected in Table VI) is caused
by “Weak Key” warnings. When presented with a certiﬁcate
containing a 512-bit RSA key, Firefox and Chrome accept it,
while Opera warns that the key is weak. If the certiﬁcate is
invalid, Opera still produces the same “Weak Key” warning,
masking other problems with the certiﬁcate, e.g., invalid issuer.
The other warnings are available in the details tab of the error
dialog, assuming Opera users know to look there.

Finally, if Firefox encounters two certs issued by the same
it shows an error
CA that have the same serial number,
message describing the problem. This message masks all other
warnings, but there is no way for the user to override it and
proceed, so this behavior is safe.

H. Other checks

Weak cryptographic hash functions. Digital signatures on
SSL/TLS certiﬁcates can use a variety of cryptographic hash
(aka message digest) functions. As Table VII shows, only
NSS, GnuTLS, and Chrome reject MD5 certiﬁcates, which
are known to be vulnerable to preﬁx-collision attacks [77].

Short keys. Table VIII shows that virtually all tested imple-
mentations support short keys (512 bits for RSA) and unusual
key sizes (1023 bits, chosen because it occurs 87 times in our
certiﬁcate corpus).

Additional checks. Table IX summarizes which SSL/TLS
libraries perform additional checks, such as Certiﬁcation Re-
vocation Lists (CRL), subject alternative name, and hostname.
The latter check is critically important for security against
man-in-the-middle attacks [31], but often delegated by libraries
to higher-level applications.

1As this paper was being prepared,

the same bug was reported in

http://news.netcraft.com/archives/2013/10/16/us-government-aiding-spying-
against-itself.html

TABLE VI: Error code(s) returned by Web browsers and SSL/TLS libraries for certiﬁcates with various combinations of Bad
Issuer (I), Expired (E), and Bad Name (N). Security vulnerabilities are highlighted in bold.

Certs

Firefox 20

E
I
IE
IN
IEN
N
NE

E
I
IE
IN
IEN
N
NE

Chrome 30

(Linux)

E
I
E
I
N
N
N

Opera 12
(Linux)

E
I
I#
I#
I#
N
E#

Opera 20

(Mac)

!E
!I
*
!I
*
+
!E

Safari 7

!E
!I
!E
!I
!E
!N
!E

Chrome 30

(Mac)

E
I
*
I
*
N
N

IE 10

OpenSSL

PolarSSL

GnuTLS

CyaSSL MatrixSSL

NSS

E
I
*
IN
*
N
NE

E
I
I
I-
I-
-
E-

E
I
I
I-
IE-
-
**-

E
I
IE
I-
**-
-
E-

E
I
**
I-
**-
-
E-

E
**
**
*-
**-
-
E-

E
I
E-
I-
E-
-
E-

* is a generic “invalid certiﬁcate” warning without a speciﬁc error message; the user cannot override this warning
+ is a generic “invalid certiﬁcate” warning without a speciﬁc error message; the user can override this warning
** is a generic “invalid certiﬁcate” error code
# all errors are shown after the user clicks the details tab
! shows a generic error message ﬁrst; the reported error is shown after user clicks the details button
- the hostname check was not enabled for any of the tested clients

TABLE VII: Support for cryptographic hash algorithms in certiﬁcate signatures

Algorithm
SHA-1
SHA-256
SHA-512
MD2
MD4
MD5

OpenSSL

accept
accept
accept
reject
reject
accept

PolarSSL

accept
accept
accept
reject
reject
accept

GnuTLS
accept
accept
accept
reject
reject

reject (w)

CyaSSL
accept
accept
reject (u)

reject
reject
accept

reject (u) : reject because hash function is unknown
reject (w) : reject because hash function is weak
reject (d) : reject under default settings

MatrixSSL

accept
reject (u)
reject (u)

reject
reject
accept

NSS
accept
accept
accept
reject
reject

reject (w)

OpenJDK

accept
accept
accept
reject

reject (d)
accept

BouncyCastle

accept
accept
accept
reject
reject
accept

Chrome
accept
accept
accept
reject
reject

reject (w)

Firefox WebKit
accept
accept
accept
accept
accept
accept
reject
reject
reject
reject
accept
accept

Opera
accept
accept
accept
reject
reject
accept

TABLE VIII: Support for short keys and unusual key sizes

Key size
512-bit RSA
1023-bit RSA

OpenSSL

accept
accept

PolarSSL

accept
accept

GnuTLS
accept
accept

CyaSSL MatrixSSL
accept
accept

accept
accept

NSS
accept
accept

OpenJDK

accept
accept

BouncyCastle

accept
accept

Chrome
accept
accept

Firefox WebKit
accept
accept
accept
accept

Opera
warning
accept

TABLE IX: Veriﬁcation of extra certiﬁcate ﬁelds

Library
MatrixSSL
PolarSSL
CyaSSL
GnuTLS
NSS
OpenSSL

CRL

*
Yes
*
Yes
Yes
*

subjectAltName

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
*

Host name

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
*

* not veriﬁed by default, application must explicitly enable

X. DEVELOPER RESPONSES

We notiﬁed the developers of all affected SSL/TLS imple-

mentations about the issues discovered by our testing.

GnuTLS has ﬁxed the bug involving version 1 intermediate
CA certiﬁcates (starting from version 3.2.11) and also created
a patch for older versions. A security advisory (CVE-2014-
1959) has been issued for this bug. GnuTLS used to check the
keyUsage ﬁeld in earlier versions, but removed these checks
after getting bug reports from developers who were using
certiﬁcates with incorrect keyUsage ﬁelds.2 This was necessary
for compatibility with several other SSL/TLS implementations
that do not check this ﬁeld. Delignat-Lavaud et al. [19]

2http://www.gnutls.org/faq.html

independently reported that GnuTLS does not reject certiﬁcates
with unknown critical extensions. According to GnuTLS, re-
jecting such certiﬁcates may allow certain corporations to lock
out GnuTLS by issuing certiﬁcates with custom extensions
and thus forcing developers to use the corporation’s own SSL
library instead of GnuTLS.

MatrixSSL plans to reject version 1 intermediate CAs and
check path length constraints starting from the next release.
In general, MatrixSSL only performs basic checks on the
certiﬁcate and depends on the application-provided callbacks
to check key usage, extended key usage, expiration timestamps,
etc. To facilitate these checks, MatrixSSL will parse the critical
ﬂags and the extended key usage extension. Since MatrixSSL
primarily targets embedded devices, which do not always have
the time zone information, in most cases the notBefore and
notAfter timestamps in the certiﬁcate will have to be checked
against the available local time.

CyaSSL is ﬁxing all reported issues. The ﬁxes will be part

of CyaSSL 3.0.0, expected to be released in April 2014.

PolarSSL is currently working on the ﬁxes.

cryptlib does not support certiﬁcate chain validation to
avoid validation failures for the users who run their own CA

127

hierarchy or do not use certiﬁcates. The cryptlib manual3 rec-
ommends other techniques for authenticating the server, such
as matching key ﬁngerprints. In addition, it strongly recom-
mends using the PSK cipher suites for mutual authentication
of both the client and server. The manual also provides an
outline for the application writers who want to use certiﬁcates
on how to perform certiﬁcate validation on their own.

NSS developers informed us that all Mozilla products use
a glue layer called Personal Security Manager (PSM) over
NSS instead of using NSS directly. The PSM certiﬁcate valida-
tion routine, CERT_VerifyCertificate, takes an argument named
CERTVerifyLog that, if not set to NULL, returns a list of all
certiﬁcate validation errors. An example usage of the function
can be found at http://mxr.mozilla.org/mozilla-central/source/
security/manager/ssl/src/SSLServerCertVeriﬁcation.cpp#622

As of this writing, we are still talking to Web-browser
developers about user warnings generated by their browsers
when certiﬁcate validation fails.

XI. CONCLUSIONS

We designed, implemented, and applied the ﬁrst automated
method for large-scale adversarial testing of certiﬁcate vali-
dation logic in SSL/TLS implementations. Our key technical
innovation is “frankencerts,” synthetic certiﬁcates randomly
mutated from parts of real certiﬁcates. Frankencerts are syn-
tactically well-formed, but may violate the X.509 speciﬁcation
and thus exercise rarely tested functionality in SSL/TLS im-
plementations. Our testing uncovered multiple ﬂaws in popular
SSL/TLS libraries and Web browsers, including security vul-
nerabilities that break server authentication guarantees and can
be exploited for stealthy man-in-the-middle attacks.

Certiﬁcate validation is only one part of the SSL/TLS hand-
shake. Bugs in other parts of the handshake—e.g., accidentally
omitting to check that the server’s messages are signed with the
key that matches the certiﬁcate [49]—and incorrect usage of
SSL/TLS implementations by higher-level software [29, 31]
can completely disable authentication and leave applications
vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks. Development of auto-
mated methods that can analyze the entire SSL/TLS software
stack and prove that it has been implemented securely and
correctly remains an open challenge.

Acknowledgments. We are grateful to Rui Qiu for partic-
ipating in the initial exploration of the ideas that
led to
this work, and to our Oakland shepherd Matthew Smith
for helping smooth rufﬂed feathers. This work was partially
supported by the NSF grants CNS-0746888, CCF-0845628,
and CNS-1223396, a Google research award, NIH grant R01
LM011028-01 from the National Library of Medicine, and
Google PhD Fellowship to Suman Jana.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Akhawe, B. Amann, M. Vallentin, and R. Sommer. Here’s
my cert, so trust me, maybe? Understanding TLS errors on the
Web. In WWW, 2013.

[2] D. Akhawe and A. Felt. Alice in Warningland: A large-
scale ﬁeld study of browser security warning effectiveness. In
USENIX Security, 2013.

3http://www.cryptlib.com/downloads/manual.pdf, page 118

128

[3] N. AlFardan and K. Paterson. Lucky thirteen: Breaking the TLS

and DTLS record protocols. In S&P, 2013.

[4] B. Amann, R. Sommer, M. Vallentin, and S. Hall. No attack
necessary: The surprising dynamics of SSL trust relationships.
In ACSAC, 2013.

[5] C. Amrutkar, K. Singh, A. Verma, and P. Traynor. Vulner-
ableMe: Measuring systemic weaknesses in mobile browser
security. In ICISS, 2012.

[6] C. Amrutkar, P. Traynor, and P. van Oorschot. An empirical
evaluation of security indicators in mobile Web browsers. IEEE
Trans. Mobile Computing, 2013.

[7] S. Anand, E. Burke, T. Chen, J. Clark, M. Cohen, W. Grieskamp,
M. Harman, M. Harrold, and P. McMinn. An orchestrated survey
of methodologies for automated software test case generation.
Journal of Systems and Software, 86(8):1978–2001, 2013.

[8] D. Bleichenbacher. Chosen ciphertext attacks against protocols
based on the RSA encryption standard PKCS #1. In CRYPTO,
1996.

[9] D. Brumley and D. Boneh. Remote timing attacks are practical.

In USENIX Security, 2003.

[10] D. Brumley, J. Caballero, Z. Liang, J. Newsome, and D. Song.
Towards automatic discovery of deviations in binary imple-
mentations with applications to error detection and ﬁngerprint
generation. In USENIX Security, 2007.

[11] C. Cadar, D. Dunbar, and D. Engler. KLEE: Unassisted and
automatic generation of high-coverage tests for complex systems
programs. In OSDI, 2008.

[12] C. Cadar and D. Engler. Execution generated test cases: How

to make systems code crash itself. In SPIN, 2005.

[13] B. Chandrasekhar, S. Khurshid, and D. Marinov. Korat: Auto-

mated testing based on Java predicates. In ISSTA, 2002.

[14] T. Chen, S. Cheung, and S. Yiu. Metamorphic testing: A
new approach for generating next test cases. Technical Re-
port HKUST-CS98-01, Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, 1998.

[15] Y. Cheon and G. Leavens. A simple and practical approach to

unit testing: The JML and JUnit way. In ECOOP, 2002.

[16] J. Clark and P. van Oorschot. SoK: SSL and HTTPS: Revisiting
past challenges and evaluating certiﬁcate trust model enhance-
ments. In S&P, 2013.

[17] Comodo report of incident. http://www.comodo.com/Comodo-

Fraud-Incident-2011-03-23.html, 2011.

[18] B. Daniel, D. Dig, K. Garcia, and D. Marinov. Automated

testing of refactoring engines. In FSE, 2007.

[19] A. Delignat-Lavaud, M. Abadi, A. Birrell, I. Mironov, T. Wob-
ber, and Y. Xie. Web PKI: Closing the gap between guidelines
and practices. In NDSS, 2014.

[20] W. Dickinson, D. Leon, and A. Podgurski. Finding failures by

cluster analysis of execution proﬁles. In ICSE, 2001.

[21] M. Dietz, A. Czeskis, D. Balfanz, and D. Wallach. Origin-bound
certiﬁcates: A fresh approach to strong client authentication for
the Web. In USENIX Security, 2012.

[22] Diginotar issues dodgy SSL certiﬁcates for Google services
http://www.theinquirer.net/inquirer/news/

after
2105321/diginotar-issues-dodgy-ssl-certiﬁcates-google-
services-break, 2011.

break-in.

[23] E. Dijkstra. A Discipline of Programming. 1976.
[24] T. Duong and J. Rizzo. Here come the ⊕ ninjas.

http://
nerdoholic.org/uploads/dergln/beast part2/ssl jun21.pdf, 2011.
[25] Z. Durumeric, J. Kasten, M. Bailey, and A. Halderman. Analysis

of the HTTPS certiﬁcate ecosystem. In IMC, 2013.

[26] Z. Durumeric, E. Wustrow, and A. Halderman. ZMap: Fast
Internet-wide scanning and its security applications. In USENIX
Security, 2013.

[27] P. Eckersley and J. Burns. An observatory for the SSLiverse.

[28] M. Ernst. Static and dynamic analysis: Synergy and duality. In

In DEFCON, 2010.

WODA, 2003.

[54] M. Marlinspike. IE SSL vulnerability. http://www.thoughtcrime.

org/ie-ssl-chain.txt, 2002.

[55] M. Marlinspike. More tricks for defeating SSL in practice.

[56] M. Marlinspike. New tricks for defeating SSL in practice. Black

DEFCON, 2009.

Hat DC, 2009.

cates.
pdf, 2009.

[57] M. Marlinspike. Null preﬁx attacks against SSL/TLS certiﬁ-
http://www.thoughtcrime.org/papers/null-preﬁx-attacks.

[58] P. Maurer. Generating test data with enhanced context-free

grammars. IEEE Software, 7(4):50–55, 1990.

[59] W. McKeeman. Differential

testing for software. Digital

Technical Journal, 10(1):100–107, 1998.

[60] A. Parsovs. Practical issues with TLS client certiﬁcate authen-

tication. In NDSS, 2014.

[61] A. Podgurski, D. Leon, P. Francis, W. Masri, M. Minch, J. Sun,
and B. Wang. Automated support for classifying software failure
reports. In ICSE, 2003.

[62] P. Purdom. A sentence generator for testing parsers. BIT

Numerical Mathematics, 12:366–375, 1972.

[63] D. Ramos and D. Engler. Practical, low-effort equivalence

veriﬁcation of real code. In CAV, 2011.

[64] The TLS protocol version 1.0. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2246,

1999.

[65] Internet X.509 public key infrastructure certiﬁcate policy
and certiﬁcation practices framework. http://www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc2527.txt, 1999.

[66] HTTP over TLS. http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2818.txt, 2000.
[67] The Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol version 1.1. http:

[68] The Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol version 1.2. http:

//tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4346, 2006.

//tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246, 2008.

[69] Internet X.509 public key infrastructure certiﬁcate and certiﬁcate
revocation list (CRL) proﬁle. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280,
2008.

[70] The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol version 3.0. http:

//tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6101, 2011.

[71] Representation and veriﬁcation of domain-based application
service identity within Internet public key infrastructure using
X.509 (PKIX) certiﬁcates in the context of Transport Layer
Security (TLS). http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6125, 2011.

[72] J. Rizzo and T. Duong. The CRIME attack. In Ekoparty, 2012.
[73] P. Saxena, D. Akhawe, S. Hanna, F. Mao, S. McCamant, and
D. Song. A symbolic execution framework for JavaScript. In
S&P, 2010.

[74] K. Sen, D. Marinov, and G. Agha. CUTE: A concolic unit

testing engine for C. In FSE, 2005.

[75] E. Sirer and B. Bershad. Using production grammars in software
testing. In Proc. 2nd Conference on Domain-speciﬁc Languages,
1999.

[76] V. Srivastava, M. Bond, K. McKinley, and V. Shmatikov. A
security policy oracle: Detecting security holes using multiple
API implementations. In PLDI, 2011.

[77] M. Stevens, A. Sotirov, J. Appelbaum, A. Lenstra, D. Molnar,
D. Osvik, and B. Weger. Short chosen-preﬁx collisions for MD5
and the creation of a rogue CA certiﬁcate. In CRYPTO, 2009.
[78] N. Vratonjic, J. Freudiger, V. Bindschaedler, and J.-P. Hubaux.
The inconvenient truth about Web certiﬁcates. In WEIS, 2011.
Finding and

[79] X. Yang, Y. Chen, E. Eide, and J. Regehr.

understanding bugs in C compilers. In PLDI, 2011.

[29] S. Fahl, M. Harbach, T. Muders, and M. Smith. Why Eve
and Mallory love Android: An analysis of SSl (in)security on
Android. In CCS, 2012.

[30] FIPS PUB 140-2: Security requirements for cryptographic mod-
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ﬁps/ﬁps140-2/ﬁps1402.

ules.
pdf, 2001.

[31] M. Georgiev, S. Iyengar, S. Jana, R. Anubhai, D. Boneh, and
V. Shmatikov. The most dangerous code in the world: Validating
SSL certiﬁcates in non-browser software. In CCS, 2012.

[32] M. Gligoric, F. Behrang, Y. Li, J. Overbey, M. Haﬁz, and
D. Marinov. Systematic testing of refactoring engines on real
software projects. In ECOOP, 2013.

[33] CVE-2014-0092. https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show bug.cgi?id=

1069865, 2014.

[34] P. Godefroid, A. Kiezun, and M. Levin. Grammar-based

whitebox fuzzing. In PLDI, 2008.

[35] P. Godefroid, N. Klarlund, and K. Sen. DART: Directed

automated random testing. In PLDI, 2005.

[36] P. Godefroid, M. Levin, and D. Molnar. Automated whitebox

fuzz testing. In NDSS, 2008.

[37] W. Halfond, S. Anand, and A. Orso. Precise interface identiﬁ-
cation to improve testing and analysis of web applications. In
ISSTA, 2009.

[38] N. Heninger, Z. Durumeric, E. Wustrow, and A. Halderman.
Mining your Ps and Qs: Detection of widespread weak keys in
network devices. In USENIX Security, 2012.

[39] J. H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems.

University of Michigan Press, 1975. Second edition, 1992.

[40] CVE-2011-0228.

http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?

name=CVE-2011-0228, 2011.

[41] V. Jagannath, Y. Lee, B. Daniel, and D. Marinov. Reducing the

costs of bounded-exhaustive testing. In FASE, 2009.

[42] S. Jana and V. Shmatikov. Abusing ﬁle processing in malware

detectors for fun and proﬁt. In S&P, 2012.

[43] J. Jones, J. Bowring, and M. Harrold. Debugging in parallel. In

ISSTA, 2007.

[44] D. Kaminsky, M. Patterson, and L. Sassaman. PKI layer cake:
New collision attacks against the global X.509 infrastructure. In
FC, 2010.

[45] S. Khurshid, C. Pasareanu, and W. Visser. Generalized symbolic

execution for model checking and testing. In TACAS, 2003.

[46] A. Kiezun, P. Guo, K. Jayaraman, and M. Ernst. Automatic
In

creation of SQL injection and cross-site scripting attacks.
ICSE, 2009.

[47] J. King. Symbolic execution and program testing. Commun.

ACM, 19(7), 1976.

[48] R. Lammel and W. Schulte. Controllable combinatorial coverage
in grammar-based testing. In Testing of Communicating Systems,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 19–38. 2006.

[49] A. Langley. Apple’s SSL/TLS bug. https://www.imperialviolet.

org/2014/02/22/applebug.html, 2014.

[50] A. Lenstra, J. Hughes, M. Augier, J. Bos, T. Kleinjung, and
C. Wachter. Ron was wrong, Whit is right. http://eprint.iacr.
org/2012/064, 2012.

[51] R. Majumdar and R. Xu. Directed test generation using

symbolic grammars. In ASE, 2007.

[52] B. Malloy and J. Power. An interpretation of Purdom’s algorithm

for automatic generation of test cases. In ICIS, 2001.

[53] D. Marinov and S. Khurshid. TestEra: A novel framework for

automated testing of Java programs. In ASE, 2001.

129

