2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

Algorithmic Transparency via
Quantitative Input Inﬂuence:
Theory and Experiments with Learning Systems

Anupam Datta

Shayak Sen

Yair Zick

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{danupam, shayaks, yairzick}@cmu.edu

Abstract—Algorithmic systems that employ machine learning
play an increasing role in making substantive decisions in modern
society, ranging from online personalization to insurance and
credit decisions to predictive policing. But their decision-making
processes are often opaque—it is difﬁcult to explain why a certain
decision was made. We develop a formal foundation to improve
the transparency of such decision-making systems. Speciﬁcally,
we introduce a family of Quantitative Input Inﬂuence (QII)
measures that capture the degree of inﬂuence of inputs on outputs
of systems. These measures provide a foundation for the design
of transparency reports that accompany system decisions (e.g.,
explaining a speciﬁc credit decision) and for testing tools useful
for internal and external oversight (e.g., to detect algorithmic
discrimination).

Distinctively, our causal QII measures carefully account for
correlated inputs while measuring inﬂuence. They support a
general class of transparency queries and can,
in particular,
explain decisions about individuals (e.g., a loan decision) and
groups (e.g., disparate impact based on gender). Finally, since
single inputs may not always have high inﬂuence, the QII
measures also quantify the joint
inﬂuence of a set of inputs
(e.g., age and income) on outcomes (e.g. loan decisions) and the
marginal inﬂuence of individual inputs within such a set (e.g.,
income). Since a single input may be part of multiple inﬂuential
sets, the average marginal inﬂuence of the input is computed
using principled aggregation measures, such as the Shapley value,
previously applied to measure inﬂuence in voting. Further, since
transparency reports could compromise privacy, we explore the
transparency-privacy tradeoff and prove that a number of useful
transparency reports can be made differentially private with very
little addition of noise.

Our empirical validation with standard machine learning algo-
rithms demonstrates that QII measures are a useful transparency
mechanism when black box access to the learning system is
available. In particular, they provide better explanations than
standard associative measures for a host of scenarios that we
consider. Further, we show that in the situations we consider,
QII is efﬁciently approximable and can be made differentially
private while preserving accuracy.

I. INTRODUCTION

Algorithmic decision-making systems that employ machine
learning and related statistical methods are ubiquitous. They
drive decisions in sectors as diverse as Web services, health-
care, education, insurance, law enforcement and defense [1],
[2], [3], [4], [5]. Yet their decision-making processes are often
opaque. Algorithmic transparency is an emerging research area
aimed at explaining decisions made by algorithmic systems.

2375-1207/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEE
© 2016, Anupam Datta. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP.2016.42
DOI 10.1109/SP.2016.42

598
598

The call for algorithmic transparency has grown in in-
tensity as public and private sector organizations increas-
ingly use large volumes of personal information and complex
data analytics systems for decision-making [6]. Algorithmic
transparency provides several beneﬁts. First, it is essential
to enable identiﬁcation of harms, such as discrimination,
introduced by algorithmic decision-making (e.g., high interest
credit cards targeted to protected groups) and to hold entities
in the decision-making chain accountable for such practices.
This form of accountability can incentivize entities to adopt
appropriate corrective measures. Second,
transparency can
help detect errors in input data which resulted in an adverse
decision (e.g., incorrect information in a user’s proﬁle because
of which insurance or credit was denied). Such errors can then
be corrected. Third, by explaining why an adverse decision
was made, it can provide guidance on how to reverse it (e.g.,
by identifying a speciﬁc factor in the credit proﬁle that needs
to be improved).

Our Goal. While the importance of algorithmic transparency
is recognized, work on computational foundations for this
research area has been limited. This paper initiates progress
in that direction by focusing on a concrete algorithmic trans-
parency question:

How can we measure the inﬂuence of inputs (or features) on
decisions made by an algorithmic system about individuals or
groups of individuals?

Our goal is to inform the design of transparency reports,
which include answers to transparency queries of this form.
To be concrete, let us consider a predictive policing system
that forecasts future criminal activity based on historical data;
individuals high on the list receive visits from the police.
An individual who receives a visit from the police may seek
a transparency report that provides answers to personalized
transparency queries about the inﬂuence of various inputs
(or features), such as race or recent criminal history, on the
system’s decision. An oversight agency or the public may
desire a transparency report that provides answers to aggregate
transparency queries, such as the inﬂuence of sensitive inputs
(e.g., gender, race) on the system’s decisions concerning the
entire population or about systematic differences in decisions

among groups of individuals (e.g., discrimination based on
race or age). These reports can thus help identify harms and
errors in input data, and provide guidance on what
input
features to work on to modify the decision.

Our Model. We focus on a setting where a transparency
report is generated with black-box access to the decision-
making system1 and knowledge of the input dataset on which
it operates. This setting models the kind of access available
to a private or public sector entity that pro-actively publishes
transparency reports. It also models a useful level of access
required for internal or external oversight of such systems
to identify harms introduced by them. For the former use
case, our approach provides a basis for design of transparency
mechanisms; for the latter,
it provides a formal basis for
testing. Returning to our predictive policing system, the law
enforcement agency that employs it could proactively publish
transparency reports, and test the system for early detection
of harms like race-based discrimination. An oversight agency
could also use transparency reports for post hoc identiﬁcation
of harms.

Our Approach. We formalize transparency reports by introduc-
ing a family of Quantitative Input Inﬂuence (QII) measures
that capture the degree of inﬂuence of inputs on outputs of
the system. Three desiderata drove the deﬁnitions of these
measures.

First, we seek a formalization of a general class of
transparency reports that allows us to answer many useful
transparency queries related to input inﬂuence, including but
not limited to the example forms described above about the
system’s decisions about individuals and groups.

Second, we seek input inﬂuence measures that appropriately
account for correlated inputs—a common case for our target
applications. For example, consider a system that assists in
hiring decisions for a moving company. Gender and the
ability to lift heavy weights are inputs to the system. They
are positively correlated with each other and with the hiring
decisions. Yet transparency into whether the system uses the
weight lifting ability or the gender in making its decisions (and
to what degree) has substantive implications for determining if
it is engaging in discrimination (the business necessity defense
could apply in the former case [7]). This observation makes
us look beyond correlation coefﬁcients and other associative
measures.

Third, we seek measures that appropriately quantify input
inﬂuence in settings where any input by itself does not have
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on outcomes but a set of inputs does.
In such cases, we seek measures of joint inﬂuence of a set
of inputs (e.g., age and income) on a system’s decision (e.g.,
to serve a high-paying job ad). We also seek measures of
marginal inﬂuence of an input within such a set (e.g., age)
on the decision. This notion allows us to provide ﬁner-grained

1By “black-box access to the decision-making system” we mean a typical
setting of software testing with complete control of inputs to the system and
full observability of the outputs.

599599

transparency about the relative importance of individual inputs
within the set (e.g., age vs. income) in the system’s decision.
We achieve the ﬁrst desideratum by formalizing a notion
of a quantity of interest. A transparency query measures the
inﬂuence of an input on a quantity of interest. A quantity of
interest represents a property of the behavior of the system for
a given input distribution. Our formalization supports a wide
range of statistical properties including probabilities of various
outcomes in the output distribution and probabilities of output
distribution outcomes conditioned on input distribution events.
Examples of quantities of interest
include the conditional
probability of an outcome for a particular individual or group,
and the ratio of conditional probabilities for an outcome for
two different groups (a metric used as evidence of disparate
impact under discrimination law in the US [7]).

We achieve the second desideratum by formalizing causal
QII measures. These measures (called Unary QII) model the
difference in the quantity of interest when the system operates
over two related input distributions—the real distribution and a
hypothetical (or counterfactual) distribution that is constructed
from the real distribution in a speciﬁc way to account for
correlations among inputs. Speciﬁcally, if we are interested in
measuring the inﬂuence of an input on a quantity of interest of
the system behavior, we construct the hypothetical distribution
by retaining the marginal distribution over all other inputs and
sampling the input of interest from its prior distribution. This
choice breaks the correlations between this input and all other
inputs and thus lets us measure the inﬂuence of this input
on the quantity of interest, independently of other correlated
inputs. Revisiting our moving company hiring example, if the
system makes decisions only using the weightlifting ability of
applicants, the inﬂuence of gender will be zero on the ratio of
conditional probabilities of being hired for males and females.
We achieve the third desideratum in two steps. First, we
deﬁne a notion of joint inﬂuence of a set of inputs (called
Set QII) via a natural generalization of the deﬁnition of the
hypothetical distribution in the Unary QII deﬁnition. Second,
we deﬁne a family of Marginal QII measures that model the
difference on the quantity of interest as we consider sets with
and without the speciﬁc input whose marginal inﬂuence we
want to measure. Depending on the application, we may pick
these sets in different ways, thus motivating several different
measures. For example, we could ﬁx a set of inputs and ask
about the marginal inﬂuence of any given input in that set on
the quantity of interest. Alternatively, we may be interested in
the average marginal inﬂuence of an input when it belongs
to one of several different sets that signiﬁcantly affect the
quantity of interest. We consider several marginal inﬂuence
aggregation measures from cooperative game theory originally
developed in the context of inﬂuence measurement in voting
scenarios and discuss their applicability in our setting. We
also build on that literature to present an efﬁcient approximate
algorithm for computing these measures.

Recognizing that different forms of transparency reports
may be appropriate for different settings, we generalize our QII
measures to be parametric in its key elements: the intervention

used to construct the hypothetical input distribution; the quan-
tity of interest; the difference measure used to quantify the
distance in the quantity of interest when the system operates
over the real and hypothetical input distributions; and the
aggregation measure used to combine marginal QII measures
across different sets. This generalized deﬁnition provides a
structure for exploring the design space of transparency re-
ports.

Since transparency reports released to an individual, reg-
ulatory agency, or the public might compromise individual
privacy, we explore the possibility of answering transparency
queries while protecting differential privacy [8]. We prove
bounds on the sensitivity of a number of transparency queries
and leverage prior results on privacy ampliﬁcation via sam-
pling [9] to accurately answer these queries.

We demonstrate the utility of the QII framework by de-
veloping two machine learning applications on real datasets:
an income classiﬁcation application based on the benchmark
adult dataset [10], and a predictive policing application
based on the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth [11].
Using these applications, we argue, in Section VII, the need
for causal measurement by empirically demonstrating that
in the presence of correlated inputs, observational measures
are not informative in identifying input inﬂuence. Further,
we analyze transparency reports of individuals in our dataset
to demonstrate how Marginal QII can provide insights into
individuals’ classiﬁcation outcomes. Finally, we demonstrate
that under most circumstances, QII measures can be made
differentially private with minimal addition of noise, and can
be approximated efﬁciently.

In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• A formalization of a speciﬁc algorithmic transparency
problem for decision-making systems. Speciﬁcally, we
deﬁne a family of Quantitative Input Inﬂuence metrics
that accounts for correlated inputs, and provides answers
to a general class of transparency queries, including the
absolute and marginal
inﬂuence of inputs on various
behavioral system properties. These metrics can inform
the design of transparency mechanisms and guide pro-
active system testing and posthoc investigations.

• A formal treatment of privacy-transparency trade-offs,
in particular, by construction of differentially private
answers to transparency queries.

• An implementation and experimental evaluation of the
metrics over two real data sets. The evaluation demon-
strates that (a) the QII measures are informative; (b) they
remain accurate while preserving differential privacy; and
(c) can be computed quite quickly for standard machine
learning systems applied to real data sets.

strongly correlated with gender (with men having better overall
lifting ability than woman). One particular question that an
analyst may want to ask is: “What is the inﬂuence of the input
Gender on positive classiﬁcation for women?”. The analyst
observes that 20% of women are approved according to his
classiﬁer. Then, he replaces every woman’s ﬁeld for gender
with a random value, and notices that the number of women
approved does not change. In other words, an intervention on
the Gender variable does not cause a signiﬁcant change in
the classiﬁcation outcome. Repeating this process with Weight
Lifting Ability results in a 20% increase in women’s hiring.
Therefore, he concludes that for this classiﬁer, Weight Lifting
Ability has more inﬂuence on positive classiﬁcation for women
than Gender.

By breaking correlations between gender and weight lifting
ability, we are able to establish a causal relationship between
the outcome of the classiﬁer and the inputs. We are able to
identify that despite the strong correlation between a negative
classiﬁcation outcome for women, the feature gender was not
a cause of this outcome. We formalize the intuition behind
such causal experimentation in our deﬁnition of Quantitative
Input Inﬂuence (QII).
We are given an algorithm A. A operates on inputs (also
referred to as features for ML systems), N = {1, . . . , n}.
(cid:2)
Every i ∈ N, can take on various states, given by Xi. We let
i∈N Xi be the set of possible feature state vectors, let
X =
Z be the set of possible outputs of A. For a vector x ∈ X
and set of inputs S ⊆ N, x|S denotes the vector of inputs in
S. We are also given a probability distribution π on X , where
π(x) is the probability of the input vector x. We can deﬁne a
marginal probability of a set of inputs S in the standard way
as follows:

πS(x|S) =

(1)
When S is a singleton set {i}, we write the marginal

{x(cid:2)∈X|x(cid:2)|S =x|S}

)

π(x(cid:3)

(cid:3)

probability of the single input as πi(x).

Informally,

to quantify the inﬂuence of an input i, we
compute its effect on some quantity of interest; that is, we
measure the difference in the quantity of interest, when the
feature i is changed via an intervention. In the example above,
the quantity of interest is the fraction of positive classiﬁcation
of women. In this paper, we employ a particular interpretation
of “changing an input”, where we replace the value of every
input with a random independently chosen value. To describe
the replacement operation for input i, we ﬁrst deﬁne an
expanded probability space on X × X , with the following
distribution:

II. UNARY QII

Consider the situation discussed in the introduction, where
an automated system assists in hiring decisions for a moving
company. The input features used by this classiﬁcation system
are : Age, Gender, Weight Lifting Ability, Marital Status and
Education. Suppose that, as before, weight lifting ability is

˜π(x, u) = π(x)π(u).

(2)
The ﬁrst component of an expanded vector (x, u), is just
the original input vector, whereas the second component repre-
sents an independent random vector drawn from the same dis-
tribution π. Over this expanded probability space, the random
variable X(x, ui) = x represents the original feature vector.

600600

The random variable X−iUi(x, u) = x|N\{i}ui, represents the
random variable with input i replaced with a random sample.
Deﬁning this expanded probability space allows us to switch
between the original distribution, represented by the random
variable X, and the intervened distribution, represented by
X−iUi. Notice that both these random variables are deﬁned
from X ×X , the expanded probability space, to X . We denote
the set of random variables of the type X ×X → X as R(X ).
We can now deﬁne probabilities over this expanded space.

For example, the probability over X remains the same:

Pr(X = x) =

=

(cid:3)
⎛
⎝ (cid:3)

{(x(cid:2),u(cid:2))|x(cid:2)=x}

)

˜π(x(cid:3), u(cid:3)
⎞
⎠(cid:8)(cid:3)

π(x(cid:3)

)

(cid:9)

π(u(cid:3)

)

{x(cid:2)|x(cid:2)=x}

u(cid:2)

In the example above, for a classiﬁer A, the quantity of
interest, the fraction of women (represented by the set W ⊆
X ) with positive classiﬁcation, can be expressed as follows:

QA(·) = E(A(·) = 1 | X ∈ W),

and the inﬂuence of input i is:

ι(i) = E(A(X) = 1 | X ∈ W)−E(A(X−iUi) = 1 | X ∈ W).
When A is clear from the context, we simply write Q rather
than QA. We now instantiate this deﬁnition with different
quantities of interest to illustrate the above deﬁnition in three
different scenarios.

= π(x)

A. QII for Individual Outcomes

Similarly, we can deﬁne more complex quantities. The
following expression represents the expectation of a classiﬁer
c evaluating to 1, when i is randomly intervened on:

(cid:3)

E(c(X−iUi) = 1) =

˜π(x, ui).

{(x,u)|c(xN\iui)=1}

Observe that the expression above computes the probability
of the classiﬁer c evaluating to 1, when input i is replaced
with a random sample from its probability distribution πi(ui).

{(x,u)|c(xN\iui)=1}

˜π(x, ui)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)

x

x

=

=

π(x)

π(x)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)

π(u)

{u|ui=u(cid:2)
i}
πi(u(cid:3)
i)

{u(cid:2)

i|c(xN\iu(cid:2)

i)=1}

{u(cid:2)

i|c(xN\iu(cid:2)

i)=1}

We can also deﬁne conditional distributions in the usual
way. The following represents the probability of the classiﬁer
evaluating to 1 under the randomized intervention on input i
of X, given that X belongs to some subset Y ⊆ X :

E(c(X−iUi) = 1 ∧ X ∈ Y)

E(X ∈ Y)

E(c(X−iUi) = 1 | X ∈ Y) =
.
Formally, for an algorithm A, a quantity of interest QA(·) :
R(X ) (cid:6)→ R is a function of a random variable from R(X ).
Deﬁnition 1 (QII). For a quantity of interest QA(·), and an
input i, the Quantitative Input Inﬂuence of i on QA(·) is
deﬁned to be

ιQA (i) = QA(X) − QA(X−iUi).

601601

One intended use of QII is to provide personalized trans-
parency reports to users of data analytics systems. For exam-
ple, if a person is denied a job application due to feedback
from a machine learning algorithm, an explanation of which
factors were most inﬂuential for that person’s classiﬁcation
can provide valuable insight into the classiﬁcation outcome.
For QII to quantify the use of an input for individual
outcomes, we deﬁne the quantity of interest to be the classiﬁ-
cation outcome for a particular individual. Given a particular
ind(·) to be E(c(·) = 1 | X = x).
individual x, we deﬁne Qx
The inﬂuence measure is therefore:

ind(i) = E(c(X) = 1 | X = x) − E(c(X−iUi) = 1 | X = x)
ιx
(3)
the probability of
positive classiﬁcation but the classiﬁcation that x actually
received, a slight modiﬁcation of the above QII measure is
more appropriate:

When the quantity of interest

is not

ind-act(i) = E(c(X) = c(x) | X = x)

ιx

−E(c(X−iUi) = c(x) | X = x)
= 1 − E(c(X−iUi) = c(x) | X = x)
= E(c(X−iUi) (cid:7)= c(x) | X = x)

(4)

The above probability can be interpreted as the probability
that feature i is pivotal to the classiﬁcation of c(x). Computing
the average of this quantity over X yields:

(cid:10)
x∈X Pr(X = x)E(i is pivotal for c(X) | X = x)

= E(i is pivotal for c(X)).

(5)
We denote this average QII for individual outcomes as
deﬁned above, by ιind-avg(i), and use it as a measure for
importance of an input towards classiﬁcation outcomes.

B. QII for Group Outcomes

III. SET AND MARGINAL QII

As in the running example, the quantity of interest may
be the classiﬁcation outcome for a set of individuals. Given a
grp(·) to be E(c(·) =
group of individuals Y ⊆ X , we deﬁne QY
1 | X ∈ Y). The inﬂuence measure is therefore:

grp(i) = E(c(X) = 1 | X ∈ Y) − E(c(X−iUi) = 1 | X ∈ Y)
ιY
(6)

C. QII for Group Disparity

Instead of simply classiﬁcation outcomes, an analyst may
be interested in more nuanced properties of data analytics
systems. Recently, disparate impact has come to the fore as a
measure of unfairness, which compares the rates of positive
classiﬁcation within protected groups deﬁned by gender or
race. The ‘80% rule’ in employment which states that the
rate of selection within a protected demographic should be
at least 80% of the rate of selection within the unprotected
demographic. The quantity of interest in such a scenario is
the ratio in positive classiﬁcation outcomes for a protected
group Y from the rest of the population X \ Y.

E(c(X) = 1 | X ∈ Y)
E(c(X) = 1 | X (cid:7)∈ Y)

However, the ratio of classiﬁcation rates is unstable at at
low values of positive classiﬁcation. Therefore, for the com-
putations in this paper we use the difference in classiﬁcation
rates as our measure of group disparity.

disp(·) = |E(c(·) = 1 | X ∈ Y) − E(c(·) = 1 | X (cid:7)∈ Y)|
QY
(7)

The QII measure of an input group disparity, as a result is:

ιY
disp(i) = QY

disp(X) − QY

disp(X−iUi).

(8)

More generally, group disparity can be viewed as an as-
sociation between classiﬁcation outcomes and membership
in a group. QII on a measure of such association (e.g.,
group disparity) identiﬁes the variable that causes the associ-
ation in the classiﬁer. Proxy variables are variables that are
associated with protected attributes. However, for concerns
of discrimination such as digital redlining, it is important
to identify which proxy variables actually introduce group
disparity. It is straightforward to observe that features with
high QII for group disparity are proxy variables, and also cause
group disparity. Therefore, QII on group disparity is a useful
diagnostic tool for determining discriminiation. The use of QII
in identifying proxy variables is explored experimentally in
Section VII-B. Note that because of such proxy variables,
simply ensuring that protected attributes are not
to
the classiﬁer is not sufﬁcient to avoid discrimination (see
also [12]).

input

602602

In many situations, intervention on a single input variable
has no inﬂuence on the outcome of a system. Consider, for
example, a two-feature setting where features are age (A) and
income (I), and the classiﬁer is c(A, I) = (A = old ) ∧ (I =
high). In other words, the only datapoints that are labeled 1
are those of elderly persons with high income. Now, given
a datapoint where A = young, I = low, an intervention on
either age or income would result in the same classiﬁcation.
However, it would be misleading to say that neither age nor
income have an inﬂuence over the outcome: changing both the
states of income and age would result in a change in outcome.
Equating inﬂuence with the individual ability to affect the
outcome is uninformative in real datasets as well: Figure 1 is a
histogram of inﬂuences of features on outcomes of individuals
for a classiﬁer learnt from the adult dataset [13]2. For most
individuals, all features have zero inﬂuence: changing the state
of one feature alone is not likely to change the outcome of
a classiﬁer. Of the 19537 datapoints we evaluate, more than
half have ιx(i) = 0 for all i ∈ N, Indeed, changes to outcome
are more likely to occur if we intervene on sets of features.
In order to get a better understanding of the inﬂuence of a
feature i ∈ N, we should measure its effect when coupled
with interventions on other features. We deﬁne the inﬂuence
of a set of inputs as a straightforward extension of the inﬂuence
of individual inputs. Essentially, we wish the inﬂuence of a set
of inputs S ⊆ N to be the same as when the set of inputs is
considered to be a single input; when intervening on S, we
draw the states of i ∈ S based on the joint distribution of the
states of features in S, πS(uS), as deﬁned in Equation (1).
i∈S Xi,

We can naturally deﬁne a distribution over X ×(cid:2)

naturally extending (2) as:

˜π(x, uS) = π(x)πS(uS).

(9)

We also deﬁne the random variable X−SUS(x, uS) =
x|N\SuS; X−S(x, uS) has the states of features in N \ S
ﬁxed to their original values in x, but features in S take on
new values according to uS.
Deﬁnition 2 (Set QII). For a quantity of interest Q, and an
input i, the Quantitative Input Inﬂuence of set S ⊆ N on Q
is deﬁned to be

(S) = Q(X) − Q(X−SUS).

ιQ

Considering the inﬂuence of a set of inputs opens up a
number of interesting questions due to the interaction between
inputs. First among these is how does one measure the
individual effect of a feature, given the measured effects of
interventions on sets of features. One natural way of doing so
is by measuring the marginal effect of a feature on a set.

2The adult dataset contains approximately 31k datapoints of users’ personal
attributes, and whether their income is more than $50k per annum; see
Section VII for more details.

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

s
l
a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Maximum Influence of some input

Fig. 1: A histogram of the highest speciﬁc causal inﬂuence
for some feature across individuals in the adult dataset. Alone,
most inputs alone have very low inﬂuence.

Deﬁnition 3 (Marginal QII). For a quantity of interest Q, and
an input i, the Quantitative Input Inﬂuence of input i over a
set S ⊆ N on Q is deﬁned to be

(i, S) = Q(X−SUS) − Q(X−S∪{i}US∪{i}).

ιQ

Notice that marginal QII can also be viewed as a difference
in set QIIs: ιQ(S ∪ {i}) − ιQ(S). Informally, the difference
between ιQ(S ∪ {i}) and ιQ(S) measures the “added value”
obtained by intervening on S ∪ {i}, versus intervening on S
alone.

The marginal contribution of i may vary signiﬁcantly based
on S. Thus, we are interested in the aggregate marginal
contribution of i to S, where S is sampled from some
natural distribution over subsets of N \ {i}. In what follows,
we describe a few measures for aggregating the marginal
contribution of a feature i to sets, based on different methods
for sampling sets. The primary method of aggregating the
marginal contribution is the Shapley value [14]. The less
theoretically inclined reader can choose to proceed to Section
V without a loss in continuity.

A. Cooperative Games and Causality

In this section, we discuss how measures from the theory of
cooperative games deﬁne measures for aggregating marginal
inﬂuence. In particular, we observe that the Shapley value [14]
is characterized by axioms that are natural in our setting.
However, other measures may be appropriate for certain input
data generation processes.
Deﬁnition 2 measures the inﬂuence that an intervention on
a set of features S ⊆ N has on the outcome. One can naturally
think of Set QII as a function v : 2N → R, where v(S) is the
inﬂuence of S on the outcome. With this intuition in mind,
one can naturally study inﬂuence measures using cooperative
game theory, and in particular, prevalent inﬂuence measures in
cooperative games such as the Shapley value, Banzhaf index
and others. These measures can be thought of as inﬂuence

603603

aggregation methods, which, given an inﬂuence measure v :
2N → R, output a vector φ ∈ R
n, whose i-th coordinate
corresponds in some natural way to the aggregate inﬂuence,
or aggregate causal effect, of feature i.

The original motivation for game-theoretic measures is
revenue division [15, Chapter 18]: the function v describes
the amount of money that each subset of players S ⊆ N can
generate; assuming that the set N generates a total revenue of
v(N ), how should v(N ) be divided amongst the players? A
special case of revenue division that has received signiﬁcant
attention is the measurement of voting power [16]. In voting
systems with multiple agents with differing weights, voting
power often does not directly correspond to the weights of the
agents. For example, the US presidential election can roughly
be modeled as a cooperative game where each state is an agent.
The weight of a state is the number of electors in that state (i.e.,
the number of votes it brings to the presidential candidate who
wins that state). Although states like California and Texas have
higher weight, swing states like Pennsylvania and Ohio tend
to have higher power in determining the outcome of elections.
A voting system is modeled as a cooperative game: players
are voters, and the value of a coalition S ⊆ N is 1 if S
can make a decision (e.g. pass a bill, form a government,
or perform a task), and is 0 otherwise. Note the similarity
to classiﬁcation, with players being replaced by features. The
game-theoretic measures of revenue division are a measure
of voting power: how much inﬂuence does player i have
in the decision making process? Thus the notions of voting
power and revenue division ﬁt naturally with our goals when
deﬁning aggregate QII inﬂuence measures: in both settings,
one is interested in measuring the aggregate effect that a single
element has, given the actions of subsets.

A revenue division should ideally satisfy certain desiderata.
Formally, we wish to ﬁnd a function φ(N, v), whose input
is N and v : 2N → R, and whose output is a vector in
n, such that φi(N, v) measures some quantity describing
R
the overall contribution of the i-th player. Research on fair
revenue division in cooperative games traditionally follows an
axiomatic approach: deﬁne a set of properties that a revenue
division should satisfy, derive a function that outputs a value
for each player, and argue that it is the unique function that
satisﬁes these properties.

Several canonical fair cooperative solution concepts rely
on the fundamental notion of marginal contribution. given a
player i and a set S ⊆ N \ {i}, the marginal contribution of
i to S is denoted mi(S, v) = v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S) (we simply
write mi(S) when v is clear from the context). Marginal QII,
as deﬁned above, can be viewed as an instance of a measure of
marginal contribution. Given a permutation π ∈ Π(N ) of the
elements in N, we deﬁne Pi(σ) = {j ∈ N | σ(j) < σ(i)};
this is the set of i’s predecessors in σ. We can now simi-
larly deﬁne the marginal contribution of i to a permutation
σ ∈ Π(N ) as mi(σ) = mi(Pi(σ)). Intuitively, one can think
of the players sequentially entering a room, according to some
ordering σ; the value mi(σ) is the marginal contribution that
i has to whoever is in the room when she enters it.

Generally speaking, game theoretic inﬂuence measures
specify some reasonable way of aggregating the marginal
contributions of i to sets S ⊆ N. That is, they measure a
player’s expected marginal contribution to sets sampled from
some distribution D over 2N , resulting in a payoff of

ES∼D[mi(S)] =

PrD [S]mi(S).

(cid:3)

S⊆N

Thus, fair revenue division draws its appeal from the degree
to which the distribution D is justiﬁable within the context
where revenue is shared. In our setting, we argue for the use
of the Shapley value. Introduced by the late Lloyd Shapley, the
Shapley value is one of the most canonical methods of dividing
revenue in cooperative games. It is deﬁned as follows:

(cid:3)

ϕi(N, v) = Eσ[mi(σ)] =

1
n!

mi(σ)

σ∈Π(N )

Intuitively, the Shapley value describes the following process:
players are sequentially selected according to some randomly
chosen order σ; each player receives a payment of mi(σ). The
Shapley value is the expected payment to the players under
this regime. The deﬁnition we use describes a distribution
over permutations of N, not its subsets; however, it is easy
to describe the Shapley value in terms of a distribution over
subsets. If we deﬁne p[S] = 1
, it is a simple exercise
n
to show that

1

(n−1|S| )
(cid:3)

S⊆N

ϕi(N, v) =

p[S]mi(S).

Intuitively, p[S] describes the following process: ﬁrst, choose
a number k ∈ [0, n − 1] uniformly at random; next, choose a
set of size k uniformly at random.

The Shapley value is one of many reasonable ways of
measuring inﬂuence; we provide a detailed review of two
others — the Banzhaf
index [17], and the Deegan-Packel
index [18] — in Appendix A.

B. Axiomatic Treatment of the Shapley Value

In this work, the Shapley value is our function of choice for
aggregating marginal feature inﬂuence. The objective of this
section is to justify our choice, and provide a brief exposition
of axiomatic game-theoretic value theory. We present
the
axioms that deﬁne the Shapley value, and discuss how they
apply in the QII setting. As we show, by requiring some
desired properties, one arrives at a game-theoretic inﬂuence
measure as the unique function for measuring information use
in our setting.

The Shapley value satisﬁes the following properties:

Deﬁnition 4 (Symmetry (Sym)). We say that i, j ∈ N are
symmetric if v(S ∪ {i}) = v(S ∪ {j}) for all S ⊆ N \ {i, j}.
A value φ satisﬁes symmetry if φi = φj whenever i and j are
symmetric.
Deﬁnition 5 (Dummy (Dum)). We say that a player i ∈ N
is a dummy if v(S ∪ {i}) = v(S) for all S ⊆ N. A value φ
satisﬁes the dummy property if φi = 0 whenever i is a dummy.

(cid:10)

Deﬁnition 6 (Efﬁciency (Eff)). A value satisﬁes the efﬁciency
property if

i∈N φi = v(N ).

All of these axioms take on a natural interpretation in the
QII setting. Indeed, if two features have the same probabilistic
effect, no matter what other interventions are already in place,
they should have the same inﬂuence. In our context,
the
dummy axiom says that a feature that never offers information
with respect to an outcome should have no inﬂuence. In the
case of speciﬁc causal inﬂuence, the efﬁciency axiom simply
states that the total amount of inﬂuence should sum to
Pr(c(X) = c(x) | X = x) − Pr(c(X−N ) = c(x) | X = x)
=1 − Pr(c(X) = c(x)) = Pr(c(X) (cid:7)= c(x)).

That is, the total amount of inﬂuence possible is the likelihood
of encountering elements whose evaluation is not c(x). This is
natural: if the vast majority of elements have a value of c(x),
it is quite unlikely that changes in features’ state will have any
effect on the outcome whatsoever; thus, the total amount of
inﬂuence that can be assigned is Pr(c(X) (cid:7)= c(x)). Similarly,
if the vast majority of points have a value different from x,
then it is likelier that a random intervention would result in a
change in value, resulting in more inﬂuence to be assigned.

In the original paper by [14], it is shown that the Shapley
value is the only function that satisﬁes (Sym), (Dum), (Eff),
as well as the additivity (Add) axiom.
Deﬁnition
games
(cid:9)N, v1(cid:10),(cid:9)N, v2(cid:10), we write (cid:9)N, v1 + v2(cid:10) to denote the game
(S) = v1(S) + v2(S) for all S ⊆ N. A value φ satisﬁes the
v(cid:3)
additivity property if φi(N, v1) + φi(N, v2) = φi(N, v1 + v2)
for all i ∈ N.

(Add)). Given

(Additivity

two

7

In our setting, the additivity axiom makes little intuitive
sense; it would imply, for example, that if we were to multiply
Q by a constant c, the inﬂuence of i in the resulting game
should be multiplied by c as well, which is difﬁcult to justify.
[19] offers an alternative characterization of the Shapley
value, based on the more natural monotonicity assumption,
which is a strong generalization of the dummy axiom.
Deﬁnition 8 (Monotonicity (Mono)). Given two games
(cid:9)N, v1(cid:10),(cid:9)N, v2(cid:10), a value φ satisﬁes strong monotonicity if
mi(S, v1) ≥ mi(S, v2) for all S implies that φi(N, v1) ≥
φi(N, v2), where a strict inequality for some set S ⊆ N
implies a strict inequality for the values as well.

Monotonicity makes intuitive sense in the QII setting: if a
feature has consistently higher inﬂuence on the outcome in one
setting than another, its measure of inﬂuence should increase.
For example, if a user receives two transparency reports (say,
for two separate loan applications), and in one report gender
had a consistently higher effect on the outcome than in the
other, then the transparency report should reﬂect this.
Theorem 9 ([19]). The Shapley value is the only function that
satisﬁes (Sym), (Eff) and (Mono).

604604

To conclude, the Shapley value is a unique way of measur-
ing aggregate inﬂuence in the QII setting, while satisfying a
set of very natural axioms.

IV. TRANSPARENCY SCHEMAS

We now discuss two generalizations of the deﬁnitions
presented in Section II, and then deﬁne a transparency schema
that map the space of transparency reports based on QII.

a) Intervention Distribution: In this paper we only con-
sider randomized interventions when the interventions are
drawn independently from the priors of the given input.
However, depending on the speciﬁc causal question at hand,
we may use different interventions. Formally, this is achieved
by allowing an arbitrary intervention distribution πinter such
that

˜π(x, u) = π(x)πinter(u).

The subsequent deﬁnitions remain unchanged. One example
of an intervention different from the randomized intervention
considered in the rest of the paper is one held constant at a
vector x0:

(cid:11)

πinter
x0 (u) =

1 for u = x0
0 o.w.

A QII measure deﬁned on the constant

intervention as
deﬁned above, measures the inﬂuence of being different from
a default, where the default is represented by x0.

b) Difference Measure: A second generalization allows
us to consider quantities of interest which are not real numbers.
Consider, for example, the situation where the quantity of
interest is an output probability distribution, as in the case
in a randomized classiﬁer. In this setting, a suitable measure
for quantifying the distance between distributions can be
used as a difference measure between the two quantities of
interest. Examples of such difference measures include the
KL-divergence [20] between distribution or distance metrics
between vectors.

c) Transparency Schema: We now present a transparency
schema that maps the space of transparency reports based on
QII measures. It consists of the following elements:

• A quantity of interest, which captures the aspect of the

system we wish to gain transparency into.

• An intervention distribution, which deﬁnes how a coun-
terfactual distribution is constructed from the true distri-
bution.

• A difference measure, which quantiﬁes the difference

between two quantities of interest.

• An aggregation technique, which combines marginal QII

measures across different subsets of inputs (features).

For a given application, one has to appropriately instantiate
this schema. We have described several instances of each
schema element. The choices of the schema elements are
guided by the particular causal question being posed. For
instance, when the question is: “Which features are most
important for group disparity?”, the natural quantity of interest

is a measure of group disparity, and the natural intervention
distribution is using the prior as the question does not suggest
a particular bias. On the other hand, when the question is:
“Which features are most inﬂuential for person A’s classiﬁca-
tion as opposed to person B?”, a natural quantity of interest is
person A’s classiﬁcation, and a natural intervention distribution
is the constant intervention using the features of person B.
A thorough exploration of other points in this design space
remains an important direction for future work.

V. ESTIMATION

While the model we propose offers several appealing prop-
erties, it faces several technical implementation issues. Several
elements of our work require signiﬁcant computational effort;
in particular, both the probability that a change in feature state
would cause a change in outcome, and the game-theoretic
inﬂuence measures are difﬁcult to compute exactly. In the
following sections we discuss these issues and our proposed
solutions.

A. Computing Power Indices

Computing the Shapley or Banzhaf values exactly is gen-
erally computationally intractable (see [21, Chapter 4] for a
general overview); however, their probabilistic nature means
that
they can be well-approximated via random sampling.
More formally, given a random variable X, suppose that we
are interested in estimating some determined quantity q(X)
(say, q(X) is the mean of X); we say that a random variable
q∗ is an ε-δ approximation of q(X) if

Pr[|q∗ − q(X)| ≥ ε] < δ;
is extremely likely that
it

in other words,
the difference
between q(X) and q∗ is no more than ε. An ε-δ approximation
scheme for q(X) is an algorithm that for any ε, δ ∈ (0, 1) is
able to output a random variable q∗ that is an ε-δ approxima-
tion of q(X), and runs in time polynomial in 1
[22] show that when (cid:9)N, v(cid:10) is a simple game (i.e. a game
where v(S) ∈ {0, 1} for all S ⊆ N), there exists an ε-
δ approximation scheme for both the Banzhaf and Shapley
values; that is, for φ ∈ {ϕ, β}, we can guarantee that for any
ε, δ > 0, with probability ≥ 1 − δ, we output a value φ∗
i such
that |φ∗

i − φi| < ε.

ε , log 1δ.

More generally, [23] observe that

the number of i.i.d.
samples needed in order to approximate the Shapley value and
Banzhaf index is parametrized in Δ(v) = maxS⊆N v(S) −
minS⊆N v(S). Thus, if Δ(v) is a bounded value, then an ε-
δ approximation exists. In our setting, coalitional values are
always within the interval [0, 1], which immediately implies
the following theorem.
Theorem 10. There exists an ε-δ approximation scheme for
the Banzhaf and Shapley values in the QII setting.

B. Estimating Q

Since we do not have access to the prior generating the
data, we simply estimate it by observing the dataset itself.
Recall that X is the set of all possible user proﬁles; in this

605605

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

case, a dataset is simply a multiset (i.e. possibly containing
multiple copies of user proﬁles) contained in X . Let D be a
ﬁnite multiset of X , the input space. We estimate probabilities
by computing sums over D. For example, for a classiﬁer c,
the probability of c(X) = 1.

x∈D 1(c(x) = 1)

ˆED(c(X) = 1) =

(10)
Given a set of features S ⊆ N, let D|S denote the elements
of D truncated to only the features in S. Then, the intervened
probability can be estimated as follows:

|D|

.

(cid:10)

uS∈D|S

(cid:10)

x∈D 1(c(x|N\SuS) = 1)

|D|2

.

ˆED(c(X−S) = 1) =

(11)
Similarly, the intervened probability on individual outcomes

can be estimated as follows:

ˆED(c(X−S) = 1|X = x) =

uS∈DS

1(c(x|N\SuS) = 1)

|D|

.

Finally, let us observe group disparity:

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ˆED(c(X−S) = 1 | X ∈ Y) − ˆED(c(X−S) = 1 | X /∈ Y)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(12)

The term ˆED(c(X−S) = 1 | X ∈ Y) equals

(13)

Thus group disparity can be written as:

(cid:3)

uS∈DS

x∈Y

1|Y|

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:12)(cid:12) 1|Y|
(cid:3)
− 1|D \ Y|
We write ˆQY

x∈D\Y

x∈Y

uS∈DS

1(c(x|N\SuS) = 1),
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

1(c(x|N\SuS) = 1)
(cid:12)(cid:12).

1(c(x|N\SuS) = 1)

uS∈DS

disp(S) to denote (13).

If D is large, these sums cannot be computed efﬁciently.
Therefore, we approximate the sums by sampling from the
dataset D. It is possible to show using the According to the
Hoeffding bound [24], partial sums of n random variables
Xi, within a bound Δ, can be well-approximated with the
following probabilistic bound:

(cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 1

n

n(cid:3)

i=1

Pr

(cid:9)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ≥ ε

(cid:13)−2nε2

(cid:14)

Δ

(Xi − EXi)

≤ 2 exp

Since all the samples of measures discussed in the paper
[0, 1], we admit an ε-δ
are bounded within the interval
approximation scheme where the number of samples n can
be chosen to be greater than log(2/δ)/2ε2. Note that these
bounds are independent of the size of the dataset. Therefore,
given an efﬁcient sampler, these quantities of interest can be
approximated efﬁciently even for large datasets.

VI. PRIVATE TRANSPARENCY REPORTS

One important concern is that releasing inﬂuence measures
estimated from a dataset might leak information about in-
dividual users; our goal is providing accurate transparency
reports, without compromising individual users’ private data.
To mitigate this concern, we add noise to make the measures
differentially private. We show that the sensitivities of the QII
measures considered in this paper are very low and therefore
very little noise needs to be added to achieve differential
privacy.

The sensitivity of a function is a key parameter in ensuring
that it is differentially private; it is simply the worst-case
change in its value, assuming that we change a single data
point in our dataset. Given some function f over datasets, we
deﬁne the sensitivity of a function f with respect to a dataset
D, denoted by Δf (D) as

|f (D) − f (D(cid:3)

)|

maxD(cid:2)

where D and D(cid:3) differ by at most one instance. We use the

shorthand Δf when D is clear from the context.

In order to not

leak information about

the users used
to compute the inﬂuence of an input, we use the standard
Laplace Mechanism [8] and make the inﬂuence measure
differentially private. The amount of noise required depends
on the sensitivity of the inﬂuence measure. We show that
the inﬂuence measure has low sensitivity for the individuals
used to sample inputs. Further, due to a result from [9] (and
stated in [25]), sampling ampliﬁes the privacy of the computed
statistic, allowing us to achieve high privacy with minimal
noise addition.

The standard technique for making any function differ-
entially private is to add Laplace noise calibrated to the
sensitivity of the function:
Theorem 11 ([8]). For any function f from datasets to R,
the mechanism Kf that adds independently generated noise
with distribution Lap(Δf (D)/) to the k output enjoys -
differential privacy.

Since each of the quantities of interest aggregate over a
large number of instances, the sensitivity of each function is
very low.
Theorem 12. Given a dataset D,
1) ΔˆED(c(X) = 1) = 1|D|
2) ΔˆED(c(X−S) = 1) ≤ 2|D|
(cid:16)
3) ΔˆED(c(X−S) = 1|X = x) = 1|D|
4) ˆQY
Proof. We examine some cases here. In Equation 10, if two
datasets differ by one instance, then at most one term of the
summation will differ. Since each term can only be either 0
or 1, the sensitivity of the function is

disp(S) ≤ max

1|D∩Y| ,

1|D\Y|

(cid:15)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0|D| − 1|D|

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =

1|D| .

ΔˆED(c(X) = 1) =

606606

Similarly, in Equation 11, an instance appears 2|D| − 1
times, once each for the inner summation and the outer
summation, and therefore, the sensitivity of the function is

ΔˆED(c(X−S) = 1) =

2|D| − 1
|D|2

≤ 2|D| .

For individual outcomes (Equation (12)), similarly, only one
term of the summation can differ. Therefore, the sensitivity of
(12) is 1/|D|.
Finally, we observe that a change in a single element x(cid:3) of
1|D∩Y| if x(cid:3) ∈ D ∩ Y, or
D will cause a change of at most
(cid:16)
1|D\Y| if x(cid:3) ∈ D \ Y. Thus, the maximal change to
of at most
(13) is at most max

(cid:15)

1|D\Y|

1|Y| ,

.

While the sensitivity of most quantities of interest is low
disp(S) can be quite high when |Y| is either
(at most a 2|D|), ˆQY
very small or very large. This makes intuitive sense: if Y is
a very small minority, then any changes to its members are
easily detected; similarly, if Y is a vast majority, then changes
to protected minorities may be easily detected.

We observe that the quantities of interest which exhibit
low sensitivity will have low inﬂuence sensitivity as well:
inﬂuence of S is 1(c(x) = 1) −
for example,
ˆED(c(X−S) = 1] | X = x); changing any x(cid:3) ∈ D (where
x(cid:3)
to the local
inﬂuence.

(cid:7)= x will result in a change of at most

the local

1|D|

Finally, since the Shapley and Banzhaf indices are normal-
ized sums of the differences of the set inﬂuence functions, we
can show that if an inﬂuence function ι has sensitivity Δι,
then the sensitivity of the indices are at most 2Δι.

To conclude, all of the QII measures discussed above
(except for group parity) have a sensitivity of α|D|, with α
being a small constant. To ensure differential privacy, we need
only need add noise with a Laplacian distribution Lap(k/|D|)
to achieve 1-differential privacy.

Further, it is known that sampling ampliﬁes differential

privacy.
Theorem 13 ([9], [25]). If A is 1-differentially private, then
for any  ∈ (0, 1), A(cid:3)
() is 2-differentially private, where
A(cid:3)
() is obtained by sampling an  fraction of inputs and
then running A on the sample.

Therefore, our approach of sampling instances from D to
speed up computation has the additional beneﬁt of ensuring
that our computation is private.

Table I contains a summary of all QII measures deﬁned in

this paper, and their sensitivity.

VII. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

We demonstrate the utility of the QII framework by develop-
ing two simple machine learning applications on real datasets.
Using these applications, we ﬁrst argue, in Section VII-A,
the need for causal measurement by empirically demonstrat-
ing that in the presence of correlated inputs, observational
measures are not informative in identifying which inputs were

607607

actually used. In Section VII-B, we illustrate the distinction
between different quantities of interest on which Unary QII
can be computed. We also illustrate the effect of discrimination
on the QII measure. In Section VII-C, we analyze transparency
reports of three individuals to demonstrate how Marginal QII
can provide insights into individuals’ classiﬁcation outcomes.
Finally, we analyze the loss in utility due to the use of
differential privacy, and provide execution times for generating
transparency reports using our prototype implementation.

We use the following datasets in our experiments:
• adult [10]: This standard machine learning benchmark
dataset is a a subset of US census data that classiﬁes
the income of individuals, and contains factors such as
age, race, gender, marital status and other socio-economic
parameters. We use this dataset to train a classiﬁer that
predicts the income of individuals from other parameters.
Such a classiﬁer could potentially be used to assist credit
decisions.

• arrests [11]: The National Longitudinal Surveys are a
set of surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
of the United States. In particular, we use the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 which is a survey of
young men and women born in the years 1980-84. Re-
spondents were ages 12-17 when ﬁrst interviewed in 1997
and were subsequently interviewed every year till 2013.
The survey covers various aspects of an individual’s life
such as medical history, criminal records and economic
parameters. From this dataset, we extract the following
features: age, gender, race, region, history of drug use,
history of smoking, and history of arrests. We use this
data to train a classiﬁer that predicts history of arrests to
aid in predictive policing, where socio-economic factors
are used to decide whether individuals should receive a
visit from the police. This application is inspired by a
similar application in [26].

The two applications described above are hypothetical ex-
amples of decision-making aided by machine learning that use
potentially sensitive socio-economic data about individuals,
and not real systems that are currently in use. We use these
classiﬁers to illustrate the subtle causal questions that our QII
measures can answer.

We use the following standard machine learning classiﬁers
in our dataset: Logistic Regression, SVM with a radial basis
function kernel, Decision Tree, and Gradient Boosted Decision
Trees. Bishop’s machine learning text [27] is an excellent
resource for an introduction to these classiﬁers. While Logistic
Regression is a linear classiﬁer, the other three are nonlinear
and can potentially learn very complex models. All our ex-
periments are implemented in Python with the numpy library,
and the scikit-learn machine learning toolkit, and run on an
Intel i7 computer with 4 GB of memory.

A. Comparison with Observational Measures

In the presence of correlated inputs, observational measures
often cannot identify which inputs were causally inﬂuential.
To illustrate this phenomena on real datasets, we train two

Name
QII on Individual Outcomes (3)
QII on Actual Individual Outcomes (4)
Average QII (5)
QII on Group Outcomes (6)
QII on Group Disparity (8)

Notation
ιind(S)
ιind-act(S)
ιind-avg(S)
ιY
grp(S)
ιY
(S)
disp

Quantity of Interest
Positive Classiﬁcation of an Individual
Actual Classiﬁcation of an Individual
Average Actual Classiﬁcation
Positive Classiﬁcation for a Group
Difference in classiﬁcation rates among groups

Sensitivity
1/|D|
1/|D|
2/|D|
2/|D ∩ Y|
2 max(1/|D \ Y|, 1/|D ∩ Y|)

TABLE I: A summary of the QII measures deﬁned in the paper

classiﬁers: (A) where gender is provided as an actual input,
and (B) where gender is not provided as an input. For classiﬁer
(B), clearly the input Gender has no effect and any correlation
between the outcome and gender is caused via inference from
other inputs. In Table II, for both the adult and the arrests
dataset, we compute the following observational measures:
Mutual Information (MI), Jaccard Index (Jaccard), Pearson
Correlation (corr), and the Disparate Impact Ratio (disp) to
measure the similarity between Gender and the classiﬁers
outcome. We also measure the QII of Gender on outcome.
We observe that in many scenarios the observational quantities
do not change, or sometimes increase, from classiﬁer A to
classiﬁer B, when gender is removed as an actual
input
to the classiﬁer. On the other hand, if the outcome of the
classiﬁer does not depend on the input Gender, then the QII
is guaranteed to be zero.

B. Unary QII Measures

In Figure 2, we illustrate the use of different Unary QII
measures. Figures 2a, and 2b, show the Average QII measure
(Equation 5) computed for features of a decision forest classi-
ﬁer. For the income classiﬁer trained on the adult dataset, the
feature with highest inﬂuence is Marital Status, followed by
Occupation, Relationship and Capital Gain. Sensitive features
such as Gender and Race have relatively lower inﬂuence.
For the predictive policing classiﬁer trained on the arrests
dataset, the most inﬂuential input is Drug History, followed by
Gender, and Smoking History. We observe that inﬂuence on
outcomes may be different from inﬂuence on group disparity.
QII on group disparity: Figures 2c, 2d show inﬂuences
of features on group disparity for two different settings. The
ﬁgure on the left shows the inﬂuence of features on group
disparity by Gender in the adult dataset; the ﬁgure on the
right shows the inﬂuence of group disparity by Race in the
arrests dataset. For the income classiﬁer trained on the
adult dataset, we observe that most inputs have negative
inﬂuence on group disparity; randomly intervening on most
inputs would lead to a reduction in group disparity. In other
words, a classiﬁer that did not use these inputs would be fairer.
Interestingly, in this classiﬁer, marital status and not sex has
the highest inﬂuence on group disparity by sex.

For the arrests dataset, most inputs have the effect of
increasing group disparity if randomly intervened on. In
particular, Drug history has the highest positive inﬂuence on
disparity in arrests. Although Drug history is correlated with
race, using it reduces disparate impact by race, i.e. makes fairer
decisions.

In both examples, features correlated with the sensitive
attribute are the most inﬂuential for group disparity according
to the sensitive attribute instead of the sensitive attribute
itself. It
is in this sense that QII measures can identify
proxy variables that cause associations between outcomes and
sensitive attributes.

QII with artiﬁcial discrimination: We simulate discrimi-
nation using an artiﬁcial experiment. We ﬁrst randomly assign
ZIP codes to individuals in our dataset. Then to simulate
systematic bias, we make an f fraction of the ZIP codes
discriminatory in the following sense: All individuals in the
protected set are automatically assigned a negative classiﬁ-
cation outcome. We then study the change in the inﬂuence
of features as we increase f. Figure 3a, shows that
the
inﬂuence of Gender increases almost linearly with f. Recall
that Marital Status was the most inﬂuential feature for this
classiﬁer without any added discrimination. As f increases,
the importance of Marital Status decreases as expected, since
the number of individuals for whom Marital Status is pivotal
decreases.

C. Personalized Transparency Reports

To illustrate the utility of personalized transparency reports,
we study the classiﬁcation of individuals who received poten-
tially unexpected outcomes. For the personalized transparency
reports, we use decision forests.

The inﬂuence measure that we employ is the Shapley value,
with the underlying cooperative game deﬁned over the local
inﬂuence Q. In more detail, v(S) = ιQA (S), with QA being
E[c(·) = 1 | X = x]; that is, the marginal contribution of
i ∈ N to S is given by mi(S) = E[c(X−S) = 1 | X =
x] − E[c(X−S∪{i}) = 1 | X = x].

We emphasize that some features may have a negative
Shapley value; this should be interpreted as follows: a feature
with a high positive Shapley value often increases the certainty
that the classiﬁcation outcome is 1, whereas a feature whose
Shapley value is negative is one that increases the certainty
that the classiﬁcation outcome would be zero.

Mr. X: The ﬁrst example is of an individual from the
adult dataset, who we refer to as Mr. X, and is described in
Figure 4a. He is is deemed to be a low income individual, by
an income classiﬁer learned from the data. This result may be
surprising to him: he reports high capital gains ($14k), and
only 2.1% of people with capital gains higher than $10k are
reported as low income. In fact, he might be led to believe that
his classiﬁcation may be a result of his ethnicity or country
of origin. Examining his transparency report in Figure 4b,
however, we ﬁnd that the the most inﬂuential features that led

608608

logistic

kernel svm

decision tree

random forest

adult
0.045
0.043
0.501
0.500
0.218
0.215
0.286
0.295
0.036

0

arrests

0.049
0.050
0.619
0.611
0.265
0.253
0.298
0.301
0.135

0

adult
0.046
0.044
0.500
0.501
0.220
0.218
0.377
0.312
0.044

0

arrests

0.047
0.053
0.612
0.615
0.247
0.260
0.033
0.096
0.149

0

adult
0.043
0.042
0.501
0.500
0.213
0.215
0.302
0.377
0.023

0

arrests

0.054
0.051
0.614
0.614
0.262
0.257
0.335
0.228
0.116

0

adult
0.044
0.043
0.501
0.501
0.218
0.215
0.315
0.302
0.012

0

arrests

0.053
0.052
0.620
0.617
0.262
0.259
0.223
0.129
0.109

0

A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
B

MI
MI

Jaccard
Jaccard

corr
corr
disp
disp
QII
QII

TABLE II: Comparison of QII with associative measures. For 4 different classiﬁers, we compute metrics such as Mutual
Information (MI), Jaccard Index (JI), Pearson Correlation (corr), Group Disparity (disp) and Average QII between Gender and
the outcome of the learned classiﬁer. Each metric is computed in two situations: (A) when Gender is provided as an input to
the classiﬁer, and (B) when Gender is not provided as an input to the classiﬁer.

to his negative classiﬁcation were Marital Status, Relationship
and Education.

Mr. Y: The second example, to whom we refer as Mr. Y
(Figure 5), has even higher capital gains than Mr. X. Mr. Y is
a 27 year old, with only Preschool education, and is engaged
in ﬁshing. Examination of the transparency report reveals that
the most inﬂuential factor for negative classiﬁcation for Mr.
Y is his Occupation. Interestingly, his low level of education
is not considered very important by this classiﬁer.

Mr. Z: The third example, who we refer to as Mr. Z
(Figure 6) is from the arrests dataset. History of drug use
and smoking are both strong indicators of arrests. However,
Mr. X received positive classiﬁcation by this classiﬁer even
without any history of drug use or smoking. On examining
his classiﬁer, it appears that race, age and gender were most
inﬂuential in determining his outcome. In other words, the
classiﬁer that we train for this dataset (a decision forest) has
picked up on the correlations between race (Black), and age
(born in 1984) to infer that this individual is likely to engage in
criminal activity. Indeed, our interventional approach indicates
that this is not a mere correlation effect: race is actively being
used by this classiﬁer to determine outcomes. Of course, in
this instance, we have explicitly offered the race parameter
to our classiﬁer as a viable feature. However, our inﬂuence
measure is able to pick up on this fact, and alert us of
the problematic behavior of the underlying classiﬁer. More
generally, this example illustrates a concern with the black
box use of machine learning which can lead to unfavorable
outcomes for individuals.
D. Differential Privacy

Most QII measures considered in this paper have very low
sensitivity, and therefore can be made differentially private
with negligible loss in utility. However, recall that the sensi-
tivity of inﬂuence measure on group disparity ιY
disp depends on
(cid:14)
the size of the protected group in the dataset D as follows:

(cid:13)

ιY
disp = 2 max

1|D \ Y| ,

1

|D ∩ Y|

For sufﬁciently small minority groups, a large amount of
noise might be required to ensure differential privacy, leading

609609

to a loss in utility of the QII measure. To estimate the loss
in utility, we set a noise of 0.005 as the threshold of noise
at which the measure is no longer useful, and then compute
fraction of times noise crosses that threshold when Laplacian
noise is added at  = 1. The results of this experiment are as
follows:Y

Loss in Utility
2.97 × 10
−14
5.41 × 10
−14
6.14 × 10
−05
0.08
0.13
3.3 × 10
3.3 × 10

Race: White
Race: Black
Race: Asian-Pac-Islander
Race: Amer-Indian-Eskimo
Race: Other
Gender: Male
Gender: Female
We note that for most reasonably sized groups, the loss in
utility is negligible. However, the Asian-Pac-Islander, and the
Amer-Indian-Eskimo racial groups are underrepresented in this
dataset. For these groups, the QII on Group Disparity estimate
needs to be very noisy to protect privacy.

Count
27816
3124
1039
311
271
21790
10771

−47
−47

E. Performance

We report runtimes of our prototype for generating trans-
parency reports on the adult dataset. Recall from Section VI
that we approximate QII measures by computing sums over
samples of the dataset. According to the Hoeffding bound to
derive an (, δ) estimate of a QII measure, at  = 0.01, and
n = 37000 samples, δ = 2 exp(−n2) < 0.05 is an upper
bound on the probability of the output being off by . Table III
shows the runtimes of four different QII computations, for
37000 samples each. The runtimes of all algorithms except
for kernel SVM are fast enough to allow real-time feedback
for machine learning application developers. Evaluating QII
metrics for Kernel SVMs is much slower than the other metrics
because each call to the SVM classiﬁer is very computationally
intensive due to a large number of distance computations that
it entails. We expect that these runtimes can be optimized
signiﬁcantly. We present them as proof of tractability.

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
n
o

I
I

Q

0.00

R elatio n s hip
O cc u p atio n
M arital Statu s

C a pital G ain

E d u c atio n
E d u c atio n-N u m

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
n
o

I
I

Q

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00

S e x

W ork cla ss
C a pital L o ss

C o u ntry

R a c e

History

D ru g

History

S e x

S m o kin g

R a c e

Y e ar

Birth

R e gio n

C e n s u s

Feature

w e e k

A g e
p er

H o urs
Feature

(a) QII of inputs on Outcomes for the adult dataset

(b) QII of inputs on Outcomes for the arrests dataset

0.28

0.23

0.18

0.13

Original Discrimination

-0.02 -0.02 -0.02 -0.02 -0.02

-0.00 -0.00 -0.00 -0.00 -0.00

0.09

0.18

y
t
i
r
a
p
s
i
D
p
u
o
r
G
n
o

I
I

Q

0.13

0.08

0.03

0.08

0.05

Original Discrimination

-0.01

-0.01

-0.00

-0.00

y
t
i
r
a
p
s
i
D
p
u
o
r
G
n
o

I
I

Q

-0.07

-0.09

0.08

0.03

M arital Statu s

S e x

O cc u p atio n

A g e
p er

w e e k

E d u c atio n
E d u c atio n-N u m
C a pital L o ss

C a pital G ain

H o urs

Feature

C o u ntry

W ork cla ss

R a c e

R elatio n s hip

R a c e

S e x

R e gio n

Y e ar

Birth

History

History

D ru g

S m o kin g

C e n s u s

Feature

(c) QII of Inputs on Group Disparity by Sex in the adult dataset

(d) Inﬂuence on Group Disparity by Race in the arrests dataset

Fig. 2: QII measures for the adult and arrests datasets

QII on Group Disparity
Average QII
QII on Individual Outcomes (Shapley)
QII on Individual Outcomes (Banzhaf)

0.73
1.12
9.30
10.34
TABLE III: Runtimes in seconds for transparency report computation

234.93
322.82
2522.3
2413.3

0.57
0.77
7.78
7.64

logistic
0.56
0.85
6.85
6.77

kernel-svm decision-tree

decision-forest

VIII. DISCUSSION

A. Probabilistic Interpretation of Power Indices

In order to quantitatively measure the inﬂuence of data
inputs on classiﬁcation outcomes, we propose causal inter-
ventions on sets of features; as we argue in Section III,
the aggregate marginal inﬂuence of i for different subsets
of features is a natural quantity representing its inﬂuence. In
order to aggregate the various inﬂuences i has on the outcome,
it is natural to deﬁne some probability distribution over (or
equivalently, a weighted sum of) subsets of N \ {i}, where
Pr[S] represents the probability of measuring the marginal
S⊆N\{i} mi(S).
contribution of i to S; Pr[S] yields a value

(cid:10)

610610

n!

k!(n−k−1)!

For the Banzhaf index, we have Pr[S] = 1
2n−1 , the Shapley
(here, |S| = k), and the Deegan-
value has Pr[S] =
Packel Index selects minimal winning coalitions uniformly at
random. These choices of values for Pr[S] are based on some
natural assumptions on the way that players (features) interact,
but they are by no means exhaustive. One can deﬁne other
sampling methods that are more appropriate for the model
at hand; for example, it is entirely possible that the only
interventions that are possible in a certain setting are of size
≤ k + 1, it is reasonable to aggregate the marginal inﬂuence

Age
Workclass
Education
Education-Num
Marital Status
Occupation
Relationship
Race
Gender
Capital Gain
Capital Loss
Hours per week
Country

23
Private
11th
7
Never-married
Craft-repair
Own-child
Asian-Pac-Islander
Male
14344
0
40
Vietnam

(a) Mr. X’s proﬁle

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

l

)
y
e
p
a
h
S
(

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
n
o

I
I

Q

0.3

C a pital G ain

W ork cla ss
G e n d er

R a c e
p er
H o urs

C a pital L o ss
w e e k

O cc u p atio n

C o u ntry

A g e

R elatio n s hip
E d u c atio n
E d u c atio n-N u m
M arital Statu s

(b) Transparency report for Mr. X’s negative classiﬁcation

Fig. 4: Mr. X

1.0

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
 
n
o
 
I
I

Q

0.00

0.0

Sex
Marital Status

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Fraction of Discriminatory Zip Codes

1.0

(a) Change in QII of inputs as discrimination by Zip Code increases
in the adult dataset

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
 
n
o
 
I
I

Q

0.05

0.0

Race
Drug History

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Fraction of Discriminatory Zip Codes

(b) Change in QII of inputs as discrimination by Zip Code increases
in the arrests dataset

Fig. 3: The effect of discrimination on QII.

(cid:11)
of i over sets of size ≤ k, i.e.

Pr[S] =

1

(n−1|S| )
0

if |S| ≤ k
otherwise.

The key point here is that one must deﬁne some aggregation
method, and that choice reﬂects some normative approach on
how (and which) marginal contributions are considered. The
Shapley and Banzhaf indices do have some highly desirable
properties, but they are, ﬁrst and foremost, a-priori measures
of inﬂuence. That is, they do not factor in any assumptions on
what interventions are possible or desirable.

One natural candidate for a probability distribution over S
is some natural extension of the prior distribution over the
dataset; for example, if all features are binary, one can identify
a set with a feature vector (namely by identifying each S ⊆ N
with its indicator vector), and set Pr[S] = π(S) for all S ⊆ N.

611611

If features are not binary, then there is no canonical way to
transition from the data prior to a prior over subsets of features.

B. Fairness

Due to the widespread and black box use of machine
learning in aiding decision making,
there is a legitimate
concern of algorithms introducing and perpetuating social
harms such as racial discrimination [28], [6]. As a result,
the algorithmic foundations of fairness in personal informa-
tion processing systems have received signiﬁcant attention
recently [29], [30], [31], [12], [32]. While many of of the
algorithmic approaches [29], [31], [32] have focused on group
parity as a metric for achieving fairness in classiﬁcation,
Dwork et al. [12] argue that group parity is insufﬁcient as
a basis for fairness, and propose a similarity-based approach
which prescribes that similar individuals should receive similar
classiﬁcation outcomes. However, this approach requires a
similarity metric for individuals which is often subjective and
difﬁcult to construct.

QII does not suggest any normative deﬁnition of fairness.
Instead, we view QII as a diagnostic tool to aid ﬁne-grained
fairness determinations. In fact, QII can be used in the spirit
of the similarity based deﬁnition of [12]. By comparing the
personalized privacy reports of individuals who are perceived

Age
Workclass
Education
Education-Num
Marital Status
Occupation
Relationship
Race
Gender
Capital Gain
Capital Loss
Hours per week
Country

27
Private
Preschool
1
Married-civ-spouse
Farming-fishing
Other-relative
White
Male
41310
0
24
Mexico

(a) Mr. Y’s proﬁle

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

l

)
y
e
p
a
h
S
(

e
m
o
c
t
u
O
n
o

I
I

Q

0.5

C a pital G ain

S e x

E d u c atio n

R elatio n s hip
W ork cla ss

R a c e

C o u ntry
C a pital L o ss
M arital Statu s

A g e
p er

w e e k

E d u c atio n-N u m
O cc u p atio n

H o urs

(b) Transparency report for Mr. Y’s negative classiﬁcation

Fig. 5: Mr. Y.

to be similar but received different classiﬁcation outcomes,
and identifying the inputs which were used by the classiﬁer to
provide different outcomes. Additionally, when group parity
is used as a criteria for fairness, QII can identify the features
that lead to group disparity, thereby identifying features being
used by a classiﬁer as a proxy for sensitive attributes.

The determination of whether using certain proxies for
sensitive attributes is discriminatory is often a task-speciﬁc
normative judgment. For example, using standardized test
scores (e.g., SAT scores) for admissions decisions is by and
large accepted, although SAT scores may be a proxy for
several protected attributes. In fact, several universities have
recently announced that they will not use SAT scores for
admissions citing this reason [33], [34]. Our goal
is not
to provide such normative judgments. Rather we seek to
provide ﬁne-grained transparency into input usage (e.g., what’s
the extent to which SAT scores inﬂuence decisions), which
is useful to make determinations of discrimination from a
speciﬁc normative position.

Finally, we note that an interesting question is whether
providing a sensitive attribute as an input to a classiﬁer is
fundamentally discriminatory behavior, even if QII can show
that
impact on the

the sensitive input has no signiﬁcant

612612

Birth Year
Drug History
Smoking History
Census Region
Race
Gender

(a) Mr. Z’s proﬁle

1984
None
None
West
Black
Male

l

)
y
e
p
a
h
S
(

e
m
o
c
t
u
O
n
o

I
I

Q

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

R a c e

Y e ar

Birth

G e n d er

R e gio n

History

D ru g

C e n s u s

History

S m o kin g

(b) Transparency report for Mr. Z’s positive classiﬁcation

Fig. 6: Mr. Z.

outcome. Our view is that this is a policy question and different
legal frameworks might take different viewpoints on it. At a
technical level, from the standpoint of information use, the
two situations are identical: the sensitive input is not really
used although it is supplied. However, the very fact that it
was supplied might be indicative of an intent to discriminate
even if that intended goal was not achieved. No matter what
the policy decision is on this question, QII remains a useful
diagnostic tool for discrimination because of the presence of
proxy variables as described earlier.

IX. RELATED WORK

A. Quantitative Causal Measures

Causal models and probabilistic interventions have been
used in a few other settings. While the form of the inter-
ventions in some of these settings may be very similar, our
generalization to account for different quantities of interests
enables us to reason about a large class of transparency
queries for data analytics systems ranging from classiﬁcation
outcomes of individuals to disparity among groups. Further,
the notion of marginal contribution which we use to compute
responsibility does not appear in this line of prior work.

Janzing et al. [35] use interventions to assess the causal
importance of relations between variables in causal graphs;
in order to assess the causal effect of a relation between two
variables, X → Y (assuming that both take on speciﬁc values
X = x and Y = y), a new causal model is constructed, where
the value of X is replaced with a prior over the possible values
of X. The inﬂuence of the causal relation is deﬁned as the KL-

Divergence of the joint distribution of all the variables in the
two causal models with and without the value of X replaced.
The approach of the intervening with a random value from the
prior is similar to our approach of constructing X−S.

Independently,

there has been considerable work in the
machine learning community to deﬁne importance metrics for
variables, mainly for the purpose of feature selection (see [36]
for a comprehensive overview). One important metric is called
Permutation Importance [37], which measures the importance
of a feature towards classiﬁcation by randomly permuting
the values of the feature and then computing the difference
of classiﬁcation accuracies before and after the permutation.
Replacing a feature with a random permutation can be viewed
as a sampling the feature independently from the prior.

There exists extensive literature on establishing causal re-
lations, as opposed to quantifying them. Prominently, Pearl’s
work [38] provides a mathematical foundation for causal rea-
soning and inference. In [39], Tian and Pearl discuss measures
of causal strength for individual binary inputs and outputs in a
probabilistic setting. Another thread of work by Halpern and
Pearl discusses actual causation [40], which is extended in [41]
to derive a measure of responsibility as degree of causality.
In [41], Chockler and Halpern deﬁne the responsibility of a
variable X to an outcome as the amount of change required
in order to make X the counterfactual cause. As we discuss
in Appendix A-B, the Deegan-Packel index is strongly related
to causal responsibility.

B. Quantitative Information Flow

One can think of our results as a causal alternative to
quantitative information ﬂow. Quantitative information ﬂow is
a broad class of metrics that quantify the information leaked
by a process by comparing the information contained before
and after observing the outcome of the process. Quantitative
Information Flow traces its information-theoretic roots to the
work of Shannon [42] and R´enyi [43]. Recent works have
proposed measures for quantifying the security of information
by measuring the amount of information leaked from inputs to
outputs by certain variables; we point the reader to [44] for an
overview, and to [45] for an exposition on information theory.
Quantitative Information Flow is concerned with information
leaks and therefore needs to account for correlations between
inputs that may lead to leakage. The dual problem of trans-
parency, on the other hand, requires us to destroy correlations
while analyzing the outcomes of a system to identify the causal
paths for information leakage.

C. Interpretable Machine Learning

An orthogonal approach to adding interpretability to ma-
chine learning is to constrain the choice of models to those that
are interpretable by design. This can either proceed through
regularization techniques such as Lasso [46] that attempt
to pick a small subset of the most important features, or
by using models that structurally match human reasoning
such as Bayesian Rule Lists [47], Supersparse Linear Integer
Models [48], or Probabilistic Scaling [49]. Since the choice

of models in this approach is restricted, a loss in predictive
accuracy is a concern, and therefore, the central focus in
this line of work is the minimization of the loss in accuracy
while maintaining interpretability. On the other hand, our
approach to interpretability is forensic. We add interpretability
to machine learning models after they have been learnt. As a
result, our approach does not constrain the choice of models
that can be used.

D. Experimentation on Web Services

There is an emerging body of work on systematic experi-
mentation to enhance transparency into Web services such as
targeted advertising [50], [51], [52], [53], [54]. The setting in
this line of work is different since they have restricted access
to the analytics systems through publicly available interfaces.
As a result they only have partial control of inputs, partial
observability of outputs, and little or no knowledge of input
distributions. The intended use of these experiments is to
enable external oversight into Web services without any coop-
eration. Our framework is more appropriate for a transparency
mechanism where an entity proactively publishes transparency
reports for individuals and groups. Our framework is also
appropriate for use as an internal or external oversight tool
with access to mechanisms with control and knowledge of
input distributions, thereby forming a basis for testing.

E. Game-Theoretic Inﬂuence Measures

Recent years have seen game-theoretic inﬂuence measures
used in various settings. Datta et al. [55] also deﬁne a measure
for quantifying feature inﬂuence in classiﬁcation tasks. Their
measure does not account for the prior on the data, nor does
it use interventions that break correlations between sets of
features. In the terminology of this paper, the quantity of
interest used by [55] is the ability of changing the outcome by
changing the state of a feature. This work greatly extends and
generalizes the concepts presented in [55], by both accounting
for interventions on sets, and by generalizing the notion of
inﬂuence to include a wide range of system behaviors, such
as group disparity, group outcomes and individual outcomes.
Game theoretic measures have been used by various re-
search disciplines to measure inﬂuence. Indeed, such measures
are relevant whenever one is interested in measuring the
marginal contribution of variables, and when sets of variables
are able to cause some measurable effect. Lindelauf et al. [56]
and Michalak et al. [57] use game theoretic inﬂuence measures
on graph-based games in order to identify key members of
terrorist networks. Del Pozo et al. [58] and Michalak et al. [59]
use similar ideas for identifying important members of large
social networks, providing scalable algorithms for inﬂuence
computation. Bork et al. [60] use the Shapley value to assign
importance to protein interactions in large, complex biological
interaction networks; Keinan et al. [61] employ the Shapley
value in order to measure causal effects in neurophysical
models. The novelty in our use of the game theoretic power
indices lies in the conception of a cooperative game via a
valuation function ι(S), deﬁned by an randomized intervention

613613

on inputs S. Such an intervention breaks correlations and
allows us to compute marginal causal inﬂuences on a wide
range of system behaviors.

X. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we present QII, a general family of metrics
for quantifying the inﬂuence of inputs in systems that process
personal information. In particular, QII lends insights into the
behavior of opaque machine learning algorithms by allowing
us to answer a wide class of transparency queries ranging
from inﬂuence on individual causal outcomes to inﬂuence
on disparate impact. To achieve this, QII breaks correlations
between inputs to allow causal reasoning, and computes the
marginal inﬂuence of inputs in situations where inputs cannot
affect outcomes alone. Also, we demonstrate that QII can
be efﬁciently approximated, and can be made differentially
private with negligible noise addition in many cases.

An immediate next step in this line of work is to explore
adoption strategies in the many areas that use personal infor-
mation to aid decision making. Areas such as healthcare [3],
predictive policing [1], education [4], and defense [5] all have
a particularly acute need for transparency in their decision
making. It is likely that speciﬁc applications will guide us in
our choice of a QII metric that is appropriate for that scenario,
which includes a choice for our game-theoretic power index.
We have not considered situations where inputs do not
have well understood semantics. Such situations arise often in
settings such as image or speech recognition, and automated
video surveillance. With the proliferation of immense process-
ing power, complex machine learning models such as deep
neural networks have become ubiquitous in these domains.
Deﬁning transparency and developing analysis techniques in
such settings is important future work.

REFERENCES

[1] W. L. Perry, B. McInnis, C. C. Price, S. C. Smith, and J. S. Hollywood,
Predictive Policing: The Role of Crime Forecasting in Law Enforcement
Operations. RAND Corporation, 2013.

[2] T. Alloway, “Big data: Credit where credits due,” http://www.ft.com/

cms/s/0/7933792e-a2e6-11e4-9c06-00144feab7de.html.

[3] T. B. Murdoch and A. S. Detsky, “The inevitable application of big
data to health care,” http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=
1674245.

[4] “Big

data

in

education,”

https://www.edx.org/course/

big-data-education-teacherscollegex-bde1x.

in

and

data
-

government,

security
[5] “Big
2015
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
big-data-in-government-defense-and-homeland-security-2015---2020.
html.

homeland

defense

2020,”

[6] J. Podesta, P. Pritzker, E. Moniz, J. Holdern, and J. Zients, “Big
data: Seizing opportunities, preserving values,” Executive Ofﬁce of the
President - the White House, Tech. Rep., May 2014.

[7] “E.G. Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 91 S. Ct. 849, 28 L.

Ed. 2d 158 (1977).”

[8] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating
noise to sensitivity in private data analysis,” in Proceedings of the
Third Conference on Theory of Cryptography, ser. TCC’06. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 265–284. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11681878 14

[9] S. Kasiviswanathan, H. Lee, K. Nissim, S. Raskhodnikova, and
A. Smith, “What can we learn privately?” in Proceedings of the 49th
IEEE Symposion on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2008),
Oct 2008, pp. 531–540.

[10] M. Lichman, “UCI machine learning repository,” 2013.

[Online].

Available: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml

[11] “National longitudinal surveys,” http://www.bls.gov/nls/.
[12] C. Dwork, M. Hardt, T. Pitassi, O. Reingold, and R. Zemel, “Fairness
through awareness,” in Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical
Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2012), 2012, pp. 214–226.

[13] M. Lichman, “UCI machine learning repository,” 2013.

[Online].

Available: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml

[14] L. Shapley, “A value for n-person games,” in Contributions to the Theory
of Games, vol. 2, ser. Annals of Mathematics Studies, no. 28. Princeton
University Press, 1953, pp. 307–317.

[15] M. Maschler, E. Solan, and S. Zamir, Game Theory.

Cambridge

University Press, 2013.

[16] L. S. Shapley and M. Shubik, “A method for evaluating the distribution
of power in a committee system,” The American Political Science
Review, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 787–792, 1954.

[17] J. Banzhaf, “Weighted voting doesn’t work: a mathematical analysis,”

Rutgers Law Review, vol. 19, pp. 317–343, 1965.

[18] J. Deegan and E. Packel, “A new index of power for simple n-person
games,” International Journal of Game Theory, vol. 7, pp. 113–123,
1978.

[19] H. Young, “Monotonic solutions of cooperative games,” International

Journal of Game Theory, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 65–72, 1985.

[20] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufﬁciency,” Annals

of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.

[21] G. Chalkiadakis, E. Elkind, and M. Wooldridge, Computational Aspects

of Cooperative Game Theory. Morgan and Claypool, 2011.

[22] Y. Bachrach, E. Markakis, E. Resnick, A. Procaccia, J. Rosenschein,
and A. Saberi, “Approximating power indices: theoretical and empirical
analysis,” Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 105–122, 2010.

[23] S. Maleki, L. Tran-Thanh, G. Hines, T. Rahwan, and A. Rogers, “Bound-
ing the estimation error of sampling-based shapley value approximation
with/without stratifying,” CoRR, vol. abs/1306.4265, 2013.

[24] W. Hoeffding, “Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random
variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 58, no.
301, pp. 13–30, March 1963. [Online]. Available: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2282952?

[25] N. Li, W. H. Qardaji, and D. Su, “Provably private data anonymization:
Or, k-anonymity meets differential privacy,” CoRR, vol. abs/1101.2604,
2011. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1101.2604

[26] Z. Jelveh and M. Luca, “Towards diagnosing accuracy loss in
discrimination-aware classiﬁcation: An application to predictive polic-
ing,” Fairness, Accountability and Transparency in Machine Learning,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 137–141, 2014.

[27] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information
Science and Statistics). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York,
Inc., 2006.

[28] S. Barocas and H. Nissenbaum, “Big data’s end run around procedural
privacy protections,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 57, no. 11, pp.
31–33, Oct. 2014.

[29] T. Calders and S. Verwer, “Three naive bayes approaches

for
discrimination-free
classiﬁcation,” Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 277–292, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10618-010-0190-x

[30] A. Datta, M. Tschantz, and A. Datta, “Automated experiments on
ad privacy settings: A tale of opacity, choice, and discrimination,” in
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PoPETs 2015), 2015,
pp. 92–112.

[31] T. Kamishima, S. Akaho, and J. Sakuma, “Fairness-aware learning
through regularization approach,” in Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 11th
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW 2011),
2011, pp. 643–650.

[32] R. Zemel, Y. Wu, K. Swersky, T. Pitassi, and C. Dwork, “Learning fair
representations,” in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML 2013), 2013, pp. 325–333.

[33] G. W. University, “Standardized test scores will be optional

for
gw applicants,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://gwtoday.gwu.edu/
standardized-test-scores-will-be-optional-gw-applicants

[34] The National Center for Fair and Open Testing, “850+ colleges and
universities that do not use sat/act scores to admit substantial numbers
of students into bachelor degree programs,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.fairtest.org/university/optional

614614

[35] D. Janzing, D. Balduzzi, M. Grosse-Wentrup, and B. Sch¨olkopf, “Quan-
tifying causal inﬂuences,” Ann. Statist., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 2324–2358,
10 2013.

[36] I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff, “An introduction to variable and feature
selection,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 1157–1182, Mar. 2003.
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=944919.944968

[37] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:

5–32, Oct. 2001.
1010933404324

[38] J. Pearl, Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference, 2nd ed. New

York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2009.

[39] J. Tian and J. Pearl, “Probabilities of causation: Bounds and identiﬁ-
cation,” Annals of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 28, no.
1-4, pp. 287–313, 2000.

[40] J. Halpern and J. Pearl, “Causes and explanations: A structural-model
approach. part i: Causes,” The British journal for the philosophy of
science, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 843–887, 2005.

[41] H. Chockler and J. Halpern, “Responsibility and blame: A structural-
model approach,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, vol. 22,
pp. 93–115, 2004.

[42] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical

theory of communication,” Bell
System Technical Journal, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x

[43] A. R´enyi, “On measures of entropy and information,” in Proceedings
the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
of
Probability, Volume 1: Contributions to the Theory of Statistics.
Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1961, pp. 547–561.
[Online]. Available: http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bsmsp/1200512181

[44] G. Smith, “Quantifying information ﬂow using min-entropy,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Conference on Quantitative Evaluation
of Systems (QEST 2011), 2011, pp. 159–167.

[45] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of information theory.

John

Wiley & Sons, 2012.

[46] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso:
the Royal Statistical Society Series
[Online]. Available: http:

a retrospective,” Journal of
B, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 273–282, 2011.
//EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:bla:jorssb:v:73:y:2011:i:3:p:273-282

[47] B. Letham, C. Rudin, T. H. McCormick, and D. Madigan, “Interpretable
classiﬁers using rules and bayesian analysis: Building a better stroke
prediction model,” Ann. Appl. Stat., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1350–1371, 09
2015. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/15-AOAS848

[48] B. Ustun, S. Trac, and C. Rudin, “Supersparse linear integer models for
interpretable classiﬁcation,” ArXiv e-prints, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1306.5860v1

[49] S. Rping, “Learning interpretable models.” Ph.D. dissertation, Dortmund

University of Technology, 2006, http://d-nb.info/997491736.

[50] S. Guha, B. Cheng, and P. Francis, “Challenges in measuring online
advertising systems,” in Proceedings of
the 10th ACM SIGCOMM
Conference on Internet Measurement, ser. IMC ’10. New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 81–87.

[51] P. Barford, I. Canadi, D. Krushevskaja, Q. Ma, and S. Muthukrishnan,
“Adscape: Harvesting and analyzing online display ads,” in Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW
’14. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 597–608.

[52] M. L´ecuyer, G. Ducoffe, F. Lan, A. Papancea, T. Petsios, R. Spahn,
A. Chaintreau, and R. Geambasu, “Xray: Enhancing the web’s trans-
parency with differential correlation,” in Proceedings of
the 23rd
USENIX Conference on Security Symposium, ser. SEC’14. Berkeley,
CA, USA: USENIX Association, 2014, pp. 49–64.

[53] A. Datta, M. C. Tschantz, and A. Datta, “Automated experiments on ad

privacy settings.” PoPETs, vol. 2015, no. 1, pp. 92–112, 2015.

[54] M. Lecuyer, R. Spahn, Y. Spiliopolous, A. Chaintreau, R. Geambasu,
and D. Hsu, “Sunlight: Fine-grained targeting detection at scale with
statistical conﬁdence,” in Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM SIGSAC Con-
ference on Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’15. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 554–566.

[55] A. Datta, A. Datta, A. Procaccia, and Y. Zick, “Inﬂuence in classiﬁcation
via cooperative game theory,” in Proceedings of the 24th International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI 2015), 2015, pp. 511–
517.

[56] R. Lindelauf, H. Hamers, and B. Husslage, “Cooperative game theoretic
centrality analysis of terrorist networks: The cases of jemaah islamiyah
and al qaeda.” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 229,
no. 1, pp. 230–238, 2013.

[57] T. Michalak, T. Rahwan, P. Szczepanski, O. Skibski, R. Narayanam,
M. Wooldridge, and N. Jennings, “Computational analysis of connec-
tivity games with applications to the investigation of terrorist networks,”
in Proceedings of the 23rd International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (IJCAI 2013), 2013, pp. 293–301.

[58] M. del Pozo, C. Manuel, E. Gonz´alez-Arang¨uena, and G. Owen,
“Centrality in directed social networks. a game theoretic approach,”
Social Networks, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 191–200, 2011.

[59] T. Michalak, K. Aaditha, P. Szczepanski, B. Ravindran, and N. Jennings,
“Efﬁcient computation of the shapley value for game-theoretic network
centrality,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, vol. 46, pp. 607–
650, 2013.

[60] P. Bork, L. Jensen, C. von Mering, A. Ramani, I. Lee, and E. Marcott,
“Protein interaction networks from yeast to human,” Current Opinions
in Structural Biology, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 292–299, 2004.

[61] A. Keinan, B. Sandbank, C. Hilgetag, I. Meilijson, and E. Ruppin, “Fair
attribution of functional contribution in artiﬁcial and biological net-
works,” Neural Computation, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 1887–1915, September
2004.

[62] M. Malawski, “Equal treatment, symmetry and banzhaf value axiom-
atizations,” International Journal of Game Theory, vol. 31, no. 1, pp.
47–67, 2002.

615615

APPENDIX A

ALTERNATIVE GAME-THEORETIC INFLUENCE MEASURES
In what follows, we describe two alternatives to the Shapley
value used in this work. The Shapley value makes intuitive
sense in our setting, as we argue in Section III-B. However,
other measures may be appropriate for certain input data
generation processes. In what follows we revisit the Banzhaf
index, brieﬂy discussed in Section III-A, and introduce the
readers to the Deegan-Packel index, a game-theoretic inﬂu-
ence measure with deep connections to a formal theory of
responsibilty and blame [41].

A. The Banzhaf Index

Recall that the Banzhaf index, denoted βi(N, v) is deﬁned

as follows:

(cid:3)

βi(N, v) =

1
2n−1

mi(S).

S⊆N\{i}

(cid:10)

The Banzhaf index can be thought of as follows: each
j ∈ N \ {i} will
join a work effort with probability 1
(or, equivalently, each S ⊆ N \ {i} has an equal chance
2
of forming); if i joins as well, then its expected marginal
contribution to the set formed is exactly the Banzhaf index.
Note the marked difference between the probabilistic models:
under the Shapley value, we sample permutations uniformly
at random, whereas under the regime of the Banzhaf index,
we sample sets uniformly at random. The different sampling
protocols reﬂect different normative assumptions. For one,
the Banzhaf index is not guaranteed to be efﬁcient; that is,
i∈N βi(N, v) is not necessarily equal to v(N ), whereas it
i=1 ϕi(N, v) = v(N ). Moreover, the
is always the case that
Banzhaf index is more biased towards measuring the marginal
contribution of i to sets of size n
n); this is because the
expected size of a randomly selected set follows a binomial
distribution B(n, 1
2 ). On the other hand, the Shapley value is
equally likely to measure the marginal contribution of i to sets
of any size k ∈ {0, . . . , k}, as i is equally likely to be in any
one position in a randomly selected permutation σ (and, in
particular, the the set of i’s predecessors in σ is equally likely
to have any size k ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}).

2 ±O(

(cid:10)n

√

Going back to the QII setting, the difference in sampling
procedure is not merely an interesting anecdote: it is a sig-
niﬁcant modeling choice. Intuitively, the Banzhaf index is
more appropriate if we assume that large sets of features
would have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on outcomes, whereas the
Shapley value is more appropriate if we assume that even
small sets of features might cause signiﬁcant effects on the
outcome. Indeed, as we mention in Section VIII, aggregating
the marginal inﬂuence of i over sets is a signiﬁcant modeling
choice; while using the measures proposed here is perfectly
reasonable in many settings, other aggregation methods may
be applicable in others.

Unlike the Shapley value, the Banzhaf index is not guar-
anteed to be efﬁcient (although it does satisfy the symmetry
and dummy properties). Indeed, [62] shows that replacing
the efﬁciency axiom with an alternative axiom, uniquely

characterizes the Banzhaf index; the axiom, called 2-efﬁciency,
prescribes the behavior of an inﬂuence measure when two
players merge. First, let us deﬁne a merged game; given a
game (cid:9)N, v(cid:10), and two players i, j ∈ N, we write T = {i, j}.
We deﬁne the game ¯v on N \ T ∪{¯t} as follows: for every set
S ⊆ N \{i, j}, ¯v(S) = v(S), and ¯v(S ∪{¯t}) = v(S ∪{i, j}),
note that the added player ¯t represents the two players i and
j who are now acting as one. The 2-Efﬁciency axiom states
that inﬂuence should be invariant under merges.
Deﬁnition 14 (2-Efﬁciency (2-EFF)). Given two players i, j ∈
N, let ¯v be the game resulting from the merge of i and j into
a single player ¯t; an inﬂuence measure φ satisﬁes 2-Efﬁciency
if φi(N, v) + φj(N, v) = φ¯t(N \ {i, j} ∪ {¯t}, ¯v).
Theorem 15 ([62]). The Banzhaf index is the only function
to satisfy (Sym), (D), (Mono) and (2-EFF).

In our context, 2-Efﬁciency can be interpreted as follows:
two features i and j as
suppose that we artiﬁcially treat
one, keeping all other parameters ﬁxed; in this setting, 2-
efﬁciency means that the inﬂuence of merged features equals
the inﬂuence they had as separate entities.

B. The Deegan-Packel Index

Finally, we discuss the Deegan-Packel index [18]. While
the Shapley value and Banzhaf index are well-deﬁned for any
coalitional game, the Deegan-Packel index is only deﬁned for
simple games. A cooperative game is said to be simple if
v(S) ∈ {0, 1} for all S ⊆ N. In our setting, an inﬂuence
measure would correspond to a simple game if it is binary
(e.g. it measures some threshold behavior, or corresponds to
a binary classiﬁer). The binary requirement is rather strong;
however, we wish to draw the reader’s attention to the Deegan-
Packel index, as it has an interesting connection to causal
responsibility [41], a variant of the classic Pearl-Halpern
causality model [40], which aims to measure the degree to
which a single variable causes an outcome.
Given a simple game v : 2N → {0, 1}, let M(v) be the set
of minimal winning coalitions; that is, for every S ∈ M(v),
v(S) = 1, and v(T ) = 0 for every strict subset of S. The
Deegan-Packel index assigns a value of

(cid:3)

δi(N, v) =

1

|M(v)|

1|S| .

S∈M(v):i∈S

The intuition behind the Deegan-Packel index is as follows:
players will not form coalitions any larger than what they
absolutely have to in order to win, so it does not make sense
to measure their effect on non-minimal winning coalitions.
Furthermore, when a minimal winning coalition is formed,
the beneﬁts from its formation are divided equally among its
members; in particular, small coalitions confer a greater beneﬁt
for those forming them than large ones. The Deegan-Packel
index measures the expected payment one receives, assuming
that every minimal winning coalition is equally likely to form.
Interestingly, the Deegan-Packel index corresponds nicely to
the notion of responsibility and blame described in [41].

616616

Suppose that we have a set of variables X1, . . . , Xn set to
x1, . . . , xn, and some binary effect f (x1, . . . , xn) (written
as f (x)) occurs (say, f (x) = 1). To establish a causal
to xi and f (x) = 1,
relation between the setting of Xi
[40] require that there is some set S ⊆ N \ {i} and some
values (yj)j∈S∪{i} such that f (x−S∪{i}, (yj)j∈S∪{i}) = 0,
but f (x−S, (yj)j∈S) = 1. In words, an intervention on the
values of both S and i may cause a change in the value of
f, but performing the same intervention just on the variables
in S would not cause such a change. This deﬁnition is at the
heart of the marginal contribution approach to interventions
that we describe in Section III-A. [41] deﬁne the responsibility
1
k+1 , where k is the size of the
of i for an outcome as
smallest set S for which the causality deﬁnition holds with
respect to i. The Deegan-Packel index can thus be thought of
as measuring a similar notion: instead of taking the overall
minimal number of changes necessary in order to make i a
direct, counterfactual cause, we observe all minimal sets that
do so. Taking the average responsibility of i (referred to as
blame in [41]) according to this variant, we obtain the Deegan-
Packel index.
Example 16. Let us examine the following setup, based on
Example 3.3 in [41]. There are n = 2k + 1 voters (n is an
odd number) who must choose between two candidates, Mr.
B and Mr. G ([41] describe the setting with n = 11). All
voters elected Mr. B, resulting in an n-0 win. It is natural to
ask: how responsible was voter i for the victory of Mr. B?
According to [41], the degree of responsibility of each voter
1
k+1 . It will require that i and k additional voters change
is
their vote in order for the outcome to change. Modeling this
setup as a cooperative game is quite natural: the voters are the
players N = {1, . . . , n}; for every subset S ⊆ N we have

(cid:11)

v(S) =

1 if |S| ≥ k + 1
0 otherwise.

That is, v(S) = 1 if and only if the set S can change the
outcome of the election. The minimal winning coalitions here
are the subsets of N of size k + 1, thus the Deegan-Packel
index of player i is

(cid:3)

δi(N, v) =

=

1

|M(v)|
1(cid:17)

(cid:18)(cid:13)

n

k+1

(cid:14)

S∈M(v):i∈S
n
k

k + 1

1

1|S|

1

n − k =

1

k + 1

=

We note that if one assumes that all voters are equally likely
to prefer Mr. B over Mr. G, then the blame of voter i would
be computed in the exact manner as the Deegan-Packel index.

617617

