2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy

SoK: Everyone Hates Robocalls: A Survey of Techniques against Telephone Spam

Huahong Tu, Adam Doupé, Ziming Zhao, and Gail-Joon Ahn

Arizona State University

{tu, doupe, zzhao30, gahn}@asu.edu

Abstract—Telephone spam costs United States consumers
$8.6 billion annually. In 2014, the Federal Trade Commission
has received over 22 million complaints of illegal and wanted
calls. Telephone spammers today are leveraging recent techni-
cal advances in the telephony ecosystem to distribute massive
automated spam calls known as robocalls. Given that anti-spam
techniques and approaches are effective in the email domain,
the question we address is: what are the effective defenses
against spam calls?

In this paper, we ﬁrst describe the telephone spam ecosys-
tem, speciﬁcally focusing on the differences between email
and telephone spam. Then, we survey the existing telephone
spam solutions and, by analyzing the failings of the current
techniques, derive evaluation criteria that are critical to an
acceptable solution. We believe that this work will help guide
the development of effective telephone spam defenses, as well
as provide a framework to evaluate future defenses.

I. INTRODUCTION

The national and global telephony system is a critical
component of our modern infrastructure and economy. In
the United States (US), the mobile telephone subscribership
penetration rate has already surpassed 100% [1]. According
to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, each day more than
240 million hours are spent on telephone calls in the United
States, equating to more than 88 trillion hours each year [2].
However, with the pervasiveness of telephone service
subscribership, telephone spam has also become an increas-
ingly prevalent issue in the US. Recent technical advances
in the telephony ecosystem are leveraged by spammers to
distribute massive automated spam calls, known as robo-
calls. The Federal Trade Commission’s (FTC) National Do
Not Call Registry’s cumulative number of complaints of
illegal calls in the US totaled more than 22 million in
2014 [3], with about 200,000 complaints each month about
robocalls alone [4]. Despite US laws prohibiting robocalling
and telephone spamming (with some exceptions), complaints
on illegal calls have reached record numbers year after
year, which indicates that the laws have not deterred the
spammers.

Spam calls are signiﬁcant annoyances for telephone users.
Unlike email spam, which can be ignored, spam calls
demand immediate attention. When a phone rings, a call
recipient generally must decide whether to accept the call
and listen to the call. After realizing that the call contains
unwanted information and disconnects from the call, the
recipient has already lost time, money (phone bill), and

2375-1207/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEE
© 2016, Huahong Tu. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP.2016.27
DOI 10.1109/SP.2016.27

320
320

least 6 seconds. Even when the recipient

productivity. A study in 2014 by Kimball et al. [5] found
that 75% of people listened to over 19 seconds of a robocall
message and the vast majority of people, 97%, listen to
at
ignores or
declines the call, today spammers can send a prerecorded
audio message directly into the recipient’s voicemail inbox.
Deleting a junk voicemail wastes even more time, taking at
least 6 steps to complete in a typical voicemail system.

Telephone spam are not only signiﬁcant annoyances,
they also result in signiﬁcant ﬁnancial loss in the econ-
omy, mostly due to scams and identity theft. According
to complaint data collected by the FTC, Americans lose
more than $8.6 billion due to fraud annually, and the vast
majority of them (and still increasing) are due to phone
communication [4]. This situation is surprising, given the
signiﬁcant gains made in reducing the amount of email
spam. This raises the question: are there any simple and
effective solutions that could stop telephone spam? The un-
fortunate answer is no. We found that this issue is not easily
solved, and, in fact, the simple and effective techniques
against email spam cannot be applied to telephone systems.
There are signiﬁcant differences and unique challenges in the
telephone ecosystem that require novel approaches. Many
existing solutions have failed to overcome these challenges
and, as a result, have yet to be widely implemented.

The objective of this paper is to survey the existing
solutions in combating telephone spam and, by analyzing the
failings of the current techniques, derive the requirements
that are critical to an acceptable solution. This work will
help guide the development of effective telephone spam
defenses, as well as provide a framework to help evaluate
the techniques against telephone spam.

The main contributions of this paper are the following:

• We describe the telephone spam ecosystem, focusing
on the players involved and the technical challenges
that make telephone spam distinct from email spam.

• We develop a taxonomy that classiﬁes the existing anti-
spam techniques into three categories, providing a high-
level view of the beneﬁts and drawbacks of each type
of technique.

• We provide a systematization of assessment criteria
for evaluating telephone spam countermeasures, and
we evaluate existing techniques using these assessment
criteria.

• We provide a discussion on what we believe to be the
future direction of solving the telephone spam problem.

II. BACKGROUND

While email spam is arguably the most well-known form
of spam, telephone spam is now more popular than ever.
The Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) is an
aggregate of various interconnected telephone networks that
adheres to the core standards created by the International
Telecommunication Union, allowing most
telephones to
intercommunicate. We deﬁne telephone spam as the mass
distribution of unwanted content to modern telephones in the
PSTN, which includes voice spam that distributes unwanted
voice content
to answered phones, and voicemail spam
that distributes unwanted voice content into the recipient’s
voicemail inbox.

Due to the much greater capacity of IP infrastructure
and the wide availability of IP-based equipment, telephony
service providers have shifted their network infrastructure to
IP-based solutions, and the operation cost of the telephone
network has dramatically decreased. While the core PSTN
infrastructure has evolved to be almost entirely IP-based,
the core signaling protocols have not changed. The entire
ecosystem still relies on the three-decade-old Signaling Sys-
tem No. 7 (SS7) [6] suite of protocols, allowing any phone to
reach any other phone through a worldwide interconnection
of switching centers.

A very common way of disseminating telephone spam
is robocalling, which uses an autodialer that automatically
dials and delivers a prerecorded message to a list of phone
numbers. An autodialer is a generic term for any com-
puter program or device that can automatically initiate calls
to telephone recipients. Today, an autodialer is usually a
computer program with Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
connectivity to a high volume VoIP-to-PSTN carrier, that
may include features such as voicemail and SMS delivery,
customizable caller ID, Call Progress Analysis, scheduled
broadcast, text-to-speech, Interactive Voice Response, etc.

The high reachability of telephone numbers has led to
telephony being an attractive spam distribution channel. Al-
most every adult in the US can be reached with a telephone
number, and the vast majority of telephone numbers are
mobile telephone subscribers. Although VoIP usage has been
growing rapidly, we found that it is more of an add-on
protocol (instead of a wholesale replacement) of existing
mobile wireless and landline services. Using 2013 statistics,
there are about 335 million mobile telephone subscribers [1],
136 million ﬁxed-telephone subscribers [7], and 34 million
VoIP subscribers [8] in the US (population 318 million).

We believe the improved cost efﬁciency of telephone
spamming, advancement of spam distribution technology,
and high reachability of telephone numbers contributed to
the recent surge in telephone spam. Furthermore, we believe
that telephone spam has the potential to be more persuasive

O
p
e
n

 
I

n
t
e
r
n
e
t

Spammer

 

I

V
o
P
C
a
r
r
i

e
r

T
r
u
n
k
L
n
e

i

 

I

n
t
e
r
e
x
c
h
a
n
g
e
C
a
r
r
i

 

e
r

 

i

L
o
n
g
D
s
t
a
n
c
e
N
e
t
w
o
r
k

 

i

T
e
r
m
n
a
t
i
o
n
C
a
r
r
i

 

e
r

i

T
e
r
m
n
a
t
i
o
n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k

 

Victims

Possibly further anonymized behind VPNs and 

Tor networks

Possibly routing through more layers than 

depicted

Figure 1: Routing of a spam call.

Victim

Spammer

VoIP
Carrier

Interexchange

Carrier

Termination 

Carrier

Leads Seller

Figure 2: The ﬂow of money in the telephone spam ecosys-
tem.

than email spam, particularly when spammers use techniques
such as caller ID spooﬁng.

A. Key Players of Telephone Spam

To understand the telephone spam ecosystem, we will ﬁrst
identify and explain the roles of all players who take part in
the routing of a telephone spam. Figure 1 show a graph-
ical depiction of the routing process: The spammer con-
nects through the Internet to an Internet Telephony Service
Provider, then the call is routed through an Interexchange
Carrier, before ﬁnally being accepted by the Termination
Carrier, who then routes the call to the victim.

Another way to understand the ecosystem is to show
how money ﬂows through the system, which we display in
Figure 2: the money ﬂows from the victim to the spammer,
and the spammer uses this money to obtain leads (new phone
numbers to spam) and to pay for the spam calls, the Internet
Telephony Service Provider receives the money from the
spammer and pays the Interexchange Carrier, who then pays
the Termination Carrier. Next we examine each of these
roles in turn.

Spammer is the agent that carries out the spamming
operation. The spammer could be part of an organization,
or an independent contractor that offers spamming-as-a-
service. The goal of the spammer is usually to extract
money from victims through sales and scams, or to launch
a campaign of harassment. For cost efﬁciency, spam calls
are typically initiated using an autodialer connected to an
Internet Telephony Service Provider to reach the PSTN
victims. Currently, spamming to VoIP victims are not as
common, mainly due to the limited pool of potential victims,
and some VoIP users, such as Skype, may not be reachable
most of the time. We will describe the spammer’s operation
in more detail in Section II-B.

321321

Internet Telephony Service Provider (ITSP), also
known as a VoIP carrier, is a type of termination carrier that
offers telecommunications service over the TCP/IP network,
i.e. the Internet. The ITSP typically offers high volume
calling at a lower cost compared to traditional carriers, and
generates revenue based on the minutes of calls hosted.
Whenever the spammer makes an outbound call to a PSTN
number, the ITSP will convert the signaling protocol from
VoIP to SS7, and route the converted signal through an
interexchange carrier.

Interexchange Carrier (IXC), also known as a long
distance carrier, is a cross-regional carrier that carries call
trafﬁc between telephone exchanges over long distances.
The IXC charges its subscribers (mainly termination carrier
such as the ITSPs and local mobile/landline carriers) for
handling long distance phone calls and compensates the
next-hop carrier (such as the recipient’s termination car-
rier) for access. Unlike the peering model between Internet
service providers [9], the IXC negotiates access rates with
other carriers, known as intercarrier compensation. In the
US, intercarrier compensation [10] is a complex system in
which the rates vary according to trafﬁc origination, location,
carrier, and trafﬁc type, and the rates are governed by
federal and state regulators. In general, when two carriers are
directly connected, the originating carrier compensates the
next-hop carrier for routing the call in the next-hop carrier’s
network.

Termination Carrier, also known as local exchange
carrier, is a carrier that provides call routing services within
a local network that terminates at its end users. The termi-
nation carrier may be operating a landline, mobile, or IP-
based telephone network. Most consumers and businesses
rely on termination carriers for their telecommunications
services. The termination carrier typically bills the IXC for
the amount of incoming trafﬁc, known as the access charge.
In the US and some other countries, the recipient subscriber
may also be partially billed for incoming calls.

B. Spammer Operation

Spamming (regardless of the medium) requires three basic
elements: a recipient list, content, and a mass distribution
channel. In addition, a more sophisticated spammer may
employ circumvention measures to defeat spam counter-
measures, and to avoid being stopped by law enforcement
agencies.

1) Gathering Numbers: Spamming ﬁrst requires a list of
potential victims to contact, and in the case of telephone
spam: a list of phone numbers. While there are many ways
a spammer could gather phone numbers, the simplest method
is to purchase the numbers from a leads seller. We did
a simple Google search (keyword “leads for sale”) and
found hundreds of websites that offers access to millions
of curated phone numbers for less than $100. There are
also other ways to harvest phone numbers, such as crawling

322322

the web, collecting form submissions, downloading leak
databases, covertly gathering through smartphone apps, or
simply generating the numbers based on phone numbering
plans. However, we do not know for sure the most popular
means of obtaining a list of phone numbers for spamming,
due to the lack of existing studies. Once the spammer gathers
a list of phone numbers, the spammer can load it in an
autodialer for mass distribution of the content.

2) Voice Spam Content: The content of telephone spam is
typically a prerecorded audio stream made by either record-
ing human voice or by using a text-to-speech synthesizer
program. Telephone spam can also deliver interactive voice
content, with the use of an Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
system. When the recipient answers a call from an autodialer
with interactive content, the recipient can interact with the
system through voice and keypad inputs, and an automated
voice message is played back based on the interaction.

There are a wide variety of spam types, such as tele-
marketing,
impersonation scam, debt collection, political
campaigns, one-ring scam, and so on. In order to provide
insight into the telephone spam content, we collected 100
audio samples from various publicly available sources where
audio recordings of voice or voicemail spam are uploaded.
We perform this analysis to gain a general understanding of
voice and voicemail spam, and we emphasize that, due to
the biased method of data collection, these results do not
constitute measurements that reﬂect trends on the whole of
voice and voicemail spam. However, these results provide
needed background and insight into the actual voice and
voicemail spam. We will describe the following prevalent
types of spam: credit card veriﬁcation scam, fake tax agent
scam, and political robocalls.

In the credit card veriﬁcation scam samples, the called
recipients are informed that their credit card account was
deactivated, and they are asked to enter their credit card and
social security number over the phone to verify their identity
and get the account reactivated. While we only were able
to listen to the audio of the call, based on comments from
some of the uploaders, the scammers would spoof the caller
ID to make it look as if the call originated from the credit
card issuer. All of these scam calls used an Interactive Voice
Response system to interact with the recipients and collect
their credit card information. We found that the audio from
the scammer’s IVR system came from either a synthesized
voice or audio duplicated from the IVR system of the real
credit card issuer. From what we observed, the use of caller
ID spooﬁng and sound duplicated from the real credit card
issuer’s IVR system made it almost indistinguishable from
a real credit card veriﬁcation call.

In the fake tax agent scam samples, the recipient receives
a call from the scammer identifying himself as a tax agent
of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and provides a fake
badge number. The scammer proceeds to tell the recipient
that he or she owes a speciﬁc amount of money to the

IRS. Often, the scammers demand immediate payment and
threaten jail, deportation, or loss of driver’s license if the
victim does not pay. Based on the comments from the
uploaders, the scammers would spoof their caller ID to make
it look as if the call originated from a government agency
by showing an area code from 202 (Washington, DC). These
scammers seem to target immigrants [11]. We found that the
majority used a live person to interact with the victim, and
the rest used a prerecorded synthesized voice without an IVR
system. One thing we noted was that all of the live person
scammers had a South Asian accent, and in our opinion, the
accent had made the call sound highly suspicious and easy
to recognize as a scam (which might explain why it was
posted online as a scam).

In the political robocall samples, the typical content is a
prerecorded message making a political advertisement, or a
poll asking the recipient about their political opinion. In the
United States, political robocalls are exempt from regulation
by the national Do-Not-Call Registry and the Telephone
Consumer Protection Act of 1991. Before a national or state
level election, they are distributed in high frequency using
voice and voicemail broadcasting autodialers. All of the
audio samples contained a prerecorded message, and most
polls used an IVR system to interact with the recipient.

3) Mass Distribution: Mass distribution is the next crit-
ical step to a successful spam operation. The goal is to
massively and cost-effectively deliver the spam content to
a list of telephone numbers.

Using VoIP service to distribute calls to PSTN numbers,
the content can be disseminated at a much higher volume,
and at a fraction of the cost compared to traditional tele-
phony. To understand the distribution cost of spamming, we
researched the prices and found hundreds of VoIP service
providers offering pay-by-the-minute calling service to US
telephone numbers priced around $0.01 per minute. We also
found some ﬁxed monthly-fee pricing model with unlimited
calling for about $150, however, these service providers tend
to target small businesses, and these plans usually come with
throttling, so high volume calling services are almost always
offered with a pay-by-the-minute model.

Some VoIP service providers (such as CallFire1 and Call-
Em-All2) even cater speciﬁcally to telemarketers, providing
features such as integrated autodialer and customizable caller
ID in their service.

4) Circumvention: Spamming is an adversarial game, as
spam defenses are widely introduced, the spammer has an
incentive to defeat them. According to a poll conducted by
Harris Poll on behalf of WhitePages in 2013, 22% of US
smartphone users used a call-blocking app or a feature to
block calls on their device [12]. Most mobile phones today

1https://www.callﬁre.com/
2https://www.call-em-all.com/

contain basic capability to automatically block calls from a
list of unwanted callers.

For the spammers today, two common ways to defeat them

is to use voicemail injection and caller ID spooﬁng.

is unanswered or declined,

Voicemail injection is a recent extension of the autodialer
which delivers prerecorded voice messages into the recipi-
ents’ voice mailbox (voicemail). Typically, when a phone
call
it gets forwarded to an
answering machine that lets the caller leave a voice mes-
sage. A voicemail broadcasting autodialer uses Answering
Machine Detection (AMD) [13] technology to automati-
cally complete the process of inserting a prerecorded voice
message into the recipient’s voicemail. A more recent type
of voicemail broadcaster can even deliberately trigger the
recipient’s voicemail, a technique known as Forced Busy
Channel [14], to directly inject a voice message into the
recipient’s voicemail without waiting for the call
to be
unanswered or declined.

Caller ID spooﬁng is the practice of deliberately falsifying
the caller ID information sent to the recipient that identiﬁes
the caller of a phone call. It is particularly effective for
defeating the call blockers and helps to further a variety of
scams. The caller ID service provides the caller’s telephone
number (and in some cases the caller’s name) to the recipient
before or during the ring of an incoming call. It allows the
recipient to decide whether to answer a call based on the
caller ID information, or to call back if the call could not be
answered. The caller ID number is also widely used in other
non-voice communication services, such as SMS, MMS, and
many smartphone apps. The caller ID number is typically
provided by the caller’s switch, which can control what
caller ID number is sent on a call-by-call basis. For general
consumers, a legally mandated privacy feature allows them
to hide the calling number [15]. However, malicious callers
can also take advantage of the declarative nature of the
caller ID mechanism to spoof or block the caller ID number,
in order to defeat spam ﬁlters and further a variety of
scams. The caller ID number can be easily spoofed because
there is no built-in authentication mechanism, and it is not
immediately veriﬁable by the recipient. The caller’s service
provider does not have any legal obligation to ensure that
the caller ID number in the call request header is indeed
owned by the caller before it is transmitted. In fact, some
ITSPs today advertise customizable caller ID as a service
feature.

III. KEY CHALLENGES

We identify several challenges in combating telephone
spam—that are signiﬁcantly different from email spam—
some of which are technical and some of which are regula-
tory.

323323

A. Immediacy Constraint

Unlike email, which can be queued for later analysis, a
voice call has an immediacy constraint. A telephone call
request is immediate and therefore must be analyzed as
soon as it appears, and the telephone anti-spam system must
complete analysis and take action within a short window of
time to reduce the delay. If a solution adds too much delay
to a call request, the legitimate caller may assume that the
recipient could not answer the phone and hang up.

B. Difﬁculty of Working with Audio Streams

The content of a voice call is difﬁcult to parse and analyze:
the content is an audio stream as opposed to the text of an
email. To make matters worse, the content of a voice call is
only revealed when the call is answered, and both the caller
and the recipient will be affected if an anti-spam system
answers the call. Whereas an email anti-spam system can
easily analyze the content of an email, and neither the sender
nor the receiver is affected.

C. Lack of Useful Header Data

Voice calls lack the rich header data of email. When a
call arrives at the recipient, it contains little useful header
information. An example of a call header used in traditional
phone terminals is shown in Table III in the Appendix. An
email header, however, has well-deﬁned and information-
rich SMTP headers—before the content of the email. It is
also difﬁcult to omit the sender’s IP address and domain
name of the email. This is in stark contrast to a call request
header, where the header data is easily omittable by a
spammer.

D. Hard to Gain User Acceptance

The bar for user acceptance of a telephone anti-spam
system is much higher compared to email. Consumers,
rightly, have a very low tolerance for false positives of
blocked calls. Phone calls tends to be more urgent and
important compared the email, and once a phone call is
wrongfully blocked it could have severe consequences.

With the rise of VoIP services that provide features such
as caller ID customization over the Internet, it is trivial for
any caller to cheaply and effectively spoof the caller ID.
Thus, any telephone spam defense technique that relies on
the caller ID is now vulnerable to caller ID spooﬁng.

F. Difﬁculty of Tracing Spam Calls

One way to combat spam is to make it illegal and enforce
those laws. In the history of email spam, a small number of
players were responsible for the majority of the spam, hence
taking action against these big targets resulted in signiﬁcant
drops of spam volume. For instance, shutting down the Rus-
tock botnet reduced global spam levels by around 40% [17].
It is reasonable to assume a similar distribution of telephone
spammers. Unfortunately, identifying the actual distribution
of telephone spammers is difﬁcult due to the technical and
regulatory challenges of monitoring PSTN trafﬁc and the
prevalence of caller ID spooﬁng.

It is difﬁcult to locate the true origin of a call after it
has been initiated. PSTN calls are designed to work on
the principle of forwarding tables and circuit switching.
Each time a call is placed, only the destination number is
used for routing. It works by establishing individual circuits
down a sequence of neighboring switches until it ends up
at the recipient’s terminal. The outbound switch(es) do not
necessarily need to know whether the optional caller ID
number in the call request header would route back to
the caller’s terminal. If the outbound switch also serves as
the caller’s inbound switch, then the TSP could perhaps
verify the true owner of the caller ID number from its own
records. However, the TSPs do not have a legal obligation to
perform any veriﬁcation, or to share that information with
the recipient, thus, without the cooperation of the caller’s
TSP, tracing a spam call is almost impossible.

To make matters worse, as spam calls can now be initiated
over the Internet, a spammer can further hide behind proxies,
VPNs, or Tor networks, or even distribute outbound calls
using a botnet, adding even more difﬁculty in tracing the
exact whereabouts of a spammer.

E. Caller ID Spooﬁng

G. Entrenched Legacy Systems

The Caller ID service is an information service that
provides the recipient with information of the caller before
answering the phone, which could be useful for blocking
spam calls. However, caller ID fundamentally has no authen-
tication mechanism and is easily spoofed. The only security
mechanism comes from having the TSP send the caller ID
on behalf of the caller. This security mechanism is eroded
when the spammer subscribes to a TSP service that allows
customization of caller IDs. It used to be prohibitively ex-
pensive for individuals and small businesses to purchase the
equipment necessary to enable the customization of caller
IDs (an ISDN-PRI trunk line costs $500 to more than $1,000
per month and a PBX system that costs thousands [16]).

The PSTN ecosystem has been around for several decades,
allowing any phone to reach any other phone through a
vast interconnection of switching centers. While the core
networks have evolved to be almost entirely carried by
an IP-based infrastructure, the signaling protocols have not
changed (to ensure legacy compatibility). Even though VoIP
is touted as a major revolution of voice communication,
the legacy of PSTN protocols will remain for many years
to come. Change is difﬁcult when the entire ecosystem
must ensure that the majority of legacy systems will work,
and therefore wholesale replacement of the core telephony
system is a nonstarter. As a result, telephone spammers can
exploit the weaknesses in the legacy technology (such as the

324324

lack of caller ID veriﬁcation) to run a successful spamming
operation.
H. Lack of Effective Regulations

Unfortunately, there is also a lack of incentive for the
industry to participate in the anti-spam effort. Unlike email
and Internet trafﬁc where the peering model [9] incentivizes
the Internet service providers to reduce the load of spam
trafﬁc on their systems, telephony service providers proﬁt
from the spam-generated trafﬁc and intercarrier compen-
sation fees. Most players (phone number collectors, lead
sellers, telephony service providers, and backbone carriers)
in the PSTN ecosystem proﬁt from telephone spam, except
the consumer. Although TSPs may beneﬁt in other ways
by reducing telephone spam (for instance, in better public
relations or charging spam-ﬁltering service as a fee), there
exists, at least, a minor monetary disincentive.

Further complicating matters, the current United States
law ensure that TSPs are immune from liability for servicing
spam calls [18] under the Telephone Consumer Protection
Act of 1991, which means that they cannot be held liable
for servicing spam calls. Classiﬁed as common carriers,
TSPs have an obligation to move all phone trafﬁc with no
exceptions [19]. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to implement anti-
spam solutions at the most natural place: the TSP who has
a direct view of the telephony network.
I. Lack of Globalized Enforcement

In the United States, a number of laws and regulation
exist at both the federal and state levels, such as making
robocalling illegal (with some exemptions) [20], making
caller ID spooﬁng illegal (with some exemptions) [21], and
the establishment of a national Do-Not-Call Registry [22].
The FTC is also interested in stopping telephone spam, and
they have held numerous competitions to combat robocall-
ing [23]. Despite resolute efforts by the US government,
robocalling and caller ID spooﬁng is still an unsolved
problem. Technology and globalization have resulted in
telephony networks shifting from a national ecosystem to a
global ecosystem. With the use of VoIP service, a telephone
spammer can cheaply distribute outbound calls from an
overseas location. Because the spammers lie beyond the
jurisdiction of US law enforcement authorities, it is hard for
law enforcement to prosecute those spammers for breaking
the law. Effective control of telephone spam would therefore
require cross-border enforcement. However, cross-border
jurisdiction of telephone spam has yet to catch up with
the present technology, and many countries would have no
incentive to cooperate with US regulatory and enforcement
agencies.

IV. BASIC TECHNIQUES

To identify the state-of-the-art in preventing voice and
voicemail spam, we gathered existing techniques from aca-
demic, industry, SPam over Internet Telephony (SPIT), and

Internet domain, and systematically categorize them into the
following classes: (1) Call Request Header Analysis, (2)
Voice Interactive Screening, and (3) Caller Compliance.

A. Call Request Header Analysis

Call Request Header Analysis is a category of techniques
that ﬁlters calls based on the header information associated
with the call request. For instance, the caller ID is a popular
type of request header information that can be used to
analyze a call. The effectiveness of Call Request Header
Analysis depends on the accuracy of
the information
collected, which could be severely impacted when spooﬁng
or omission is possible.

Caller ID Blacklisting rejects a call if the caller’s phone
number (captured from caller ID or Automatic Number
Identiﬁcation service) appears on a blacklist, otherwise,
calls from all other phone numbers are accepted. This
can be used to block spam calls by blacklisting phone
numbers that are known to be spamming, and the recipient’s
terminal would silently block all phone calls from those
phone numbers without disturbing the recipient. Caller ID
Blacklisting only blocks phone numbers that are explicitly
added to a blacklist, hence it tends to be permissive to all
other callers. As caller ID service has become ubiquitous
in all telephone services, Caller ID Blacklisting does not
face compatibility issues. Caller ID Blacklisting is easy to
implement and requires very little computational resources,
and it is a common feature in modern smartphones [24],
[25]. However, a blacklist must be well populated to be
effective against spam, therefore compiling a comprehensive
list would not be scalable for the recipient. A spammer
could defeat Caller ID Blacklisting by spooﬁng any number
not known to be blacklisted, hence it is not effective against
most forms of call request header manipulation.

Caller ID Whitelisting only accepts calls from phone
numbers that appear on a whitelist, otherwise, calls from
all other phone numbers are rejected. This can be used to
block spam calls by whitelisting phone numbers that are
known to be trusted, and the recipient’s terminal would
silently block phone calls from all other phone numbers
without disturbing the recipient. Caller ID Whitelisting is
easy to implement and requires very little resources, and
it is easy to ﬁnd implementations on modern smartphones
[26], [27]. Caller ID Whitelisting blocks all calls that are
not added to a whitelist, and does not need to be well
populated to be effective against spam, hence it is quite
scalable for the recipient when defending against spam. It
is usually quite easy to populate a whitelist, as the numbers
could be derived from the recipient’s contacts list. However,
unknown legitimate callers would always get blocked in
Caller ID Whitelisting. A spammer could defeat Caller ID
Whitelisting by spooﬁng the caller ID of a number known

325325

to be trusted by the recipient, however this is more difﬁcult
without prior knowledge about the recipient’s whitelist.

[29],

reputation or

[28]–[31], caller behavior

Caller Reputation System uses
trust
associated with a caller’s phone number to determine if the
caller is a spammer. A Caller Reputation System maintains
and publishes reputation scores associated with individual
callers, in which the reputation scores are computed based
on various caller-related information such as recipient
black/white-lists
[32],
[33], recipient behavior [28], [34], [35], caller’s domain
reputation [30], [36], social connections [34], [37]–[40], and
recipient feedbacks [28], [29], [31], [36], [41], [42]. There
are also many opportunities to improve a Caller Reputation
System by developing better scoring algorithms. The Caller
Reputation System can be used to ﬁlter spam calls by
conﬁguring the recipient’s terminal
to block calls from
callers associated with poor reputation. A Caller Reputation
System generally requires a large amount of data, which are
usually crowdsourced from many recipients, and the data
would need to be curated by an administrative third party. It
would also require frequent maintenance to ensure quality
and freshness of data in order to be effective. However,
large scale collection of personal information could be at
risk of violating privacy. Caller Reputation System could be
vulnerable to Sybil attacks, where a malicious caller obtains
multiple identities to gain a large inﬂuence over its own (or
other caller’s) reputation. Because the reputation of a caller
is associated with the caller’s phone number, a spammer
could defeat the Caller Reputation System by spooﬁng the
caller ID to a number with a good reputation. A malicious
caller could also sabotage someone by deliberately making
junk calls while spooﬁng the caller ID number, such that
the victim gets a poor reputation.

[46],

[47],

[44],

[39],

invalid recipient count/ratio [39],

Caller Behavior Analysis uses the call behavioral features
associated with a caller’s phone number to determine if
the caller is a spammer, using behavioral features such as
call count/velocity [29], [33], [39], [43]–[49], call duration
sum/mean/variance [29], [39], [44]–[46], [48]–[50], call
rejection count/ratio [35],
[49],
[51], [52], recipient diversity count/ratio [44], [45], [49],
[52],
[51],
repeated call count/ratio [45], [52], outbound-to-inbound
ratio [33], [48], [51], [53], [54], simultaneous calls [46],
and caller’s domain behavior [32], [51]. There are also
many opportunities to improve the technique by developing
better classiﬁcation algorithms. Acquiring the caller’s
behavioral information usually requires participation from
the caller’s telephony service provider or a honeypot of
telephones [33], [35]. If not required by regulation, it is
usually not in the TSP’s business interest to report on or
impose a call behavior restriction on their callers. The
callers’ behavioral information would need to be updated

[47]–[49],

frequently to ensure accuracy and freshness in order to be
effective. Large scale collection of callers’ call behavior
could also face privacy issues and numerous obstacles from
legal regulations. Because the call behavior of a caller is
associated with the caller’s phone number, a spammer could
defeat the Caller Reputation System by spooﬁng the caller
ID to a number with good calling behavior. Furthermore, a
spammer could hide its illegitimate call behaviors by using
multiple caller identities.

Device Fingerprinting collects a variety of metadata from
the call request header for the purpose of creating a device
ﬁngerprint of a caller’s terminal. Device ﬁngerprinting
improves the accuracy of determining the caller’s identity
by using only a set of information that meets the properties
of diversity and stability. Device Fingerprinting has been
proposed for SPIT prevention by blacklisting or whitelisting
the device ﬁngerprints of SIP-based terminals
[55].
However,
information is a
scarce resource. This is due to the little amount of header
information in PSTN call requests (an example of which is
shown in Table III in the Appendix) compared to SIP or
email, resulting in having too little workable information
for device ﬁngerprinting to work effectively.

in PSTN, device ﬁngerprint

Caller ID Anomaly Detection searches for anomalous
patterns in the caller ID, such as invalid format, invalid
number, unavailable number, toll-free number, area codes,
regular expression, to determine if the caller is a spammer.
Caller ID Anomaly Detection is quite easy to implement and
requires very little computational resources and, therefore,
is easy to ﬁnd in several call blocking apps [56], [57].
Caller ID Anomaly Detection does not track information
associated with any individual caller,
looks
for general patterns in the caller ID that can be used to
differentiate spammers and legitimate callers. As Caller
ID Anomaly Detection tend to ﬁnd matches more broadly,
it tends to be easier to manage and maintain. However,
some patterns may be potentially prone to false negatives,
and therefore may restrict some legitimate callers, such as
VoIP users or privacy enabled callers. A spammer could
defeat Caller ID Anomaly Detection by carefully crafting
the caller ID to not trigger any known anomalous patterns.

instead,

it

ANI-CPN Matching checks whether the Calling Party
Number (CPN) captured by the caller ID service matches
with the Automatic Number Identiﬁcation (ANI) number
captured by the ANI service [58]. Automatic Number
Identiﬁcation service [59] is a separate type of calling line
identiﬁcation service that can capture the calling number
information even when the caller ID is not presented. It
was originally designed to obtain the calling party’s billing
number from a local exchange carrier to any interconnecting
carrier for billing of long distance calls. In most cases,

326326

the billing number is the same as the CPN, and usually
when a mismatch happens it
is likely due to caller ID
spooﬁng, or the caller is calling from a private branch
exchange (PBX). ANI-CPN Matching assumes that a
legitimate caller’s CPN matches the ANI number whereas
a malicious caller would spoof the CPN which results in
a mismatch. However, ANI service are usually not made
available to regular consumers (usually only offered to
800 toll-free, 900 premium-rate, or 911 emergency service
lines), therefore, only some businesses would beneﬁt from
this technique. ANI service is also not always reliable at
capturing the caller’s ANI number. Placing a legitimate call
using an outbound VoIP service or a calling card service
would result in a non-working or a generic ANI number
being captured. As a result, false positives may frequently
occur which hinders user acceptance.

ANI-II Filtering can be used to ﬁlter spam calls by
blocking certain types of origin service captured by the
ANI-II service. ANI-II [60] is an extension of the ANI
service that identiﬁes the type of service associated with the
originating switch. Each type of service is represented by
a two-digit code. ANI-II Filtering assumes that legitimate
callers would have a valid (00 or 61) ANI-II code, whereas,
malicious callers would be making VoIP calls that would
have an invalid ANI Failure (02) code, and therefore
should be blocked. However, with the growing use of
VoIP service by regular consumers, this technique could
potentially result in too many false positives if all calls
with ANI Failure codes are blocked. Only some businesses
would beneﬁt from an implementation of this technique, as
ANI-II service is usually offered only to premium-rate, toll-
free, or emergency lines. Therefore, this technique would
not be accessible or cost effective for the regular consumers.

B. Voice Interactive Screening

Voice Interactive Screening is a category of techniques
that forces the caller to interact with a voice input-based
interactive system and decide if the call
is spam after
analyzing the caller’s interaction. The system either requires
active or passive interaction from the caller. An active
interaction system relies on the caller providing a response
to a speciﬁc task which requires some effort from the
caller, whereas a passive interaction system silently gathers
the caller’s response without explicitly informing the caller.
Voice Interactive Screening techniques do not need to
rely on the caller ID or any other call request header
information, hence they are generally not vulnerable to
caller ID spooﬁng. However, Voice Interactive Screening
techniques generally require processing of audio signals,
which tends to be more complex to implement. Because
these techniques can only work after recording a length of
the caller’s voice, all Voice Interactive Screening techniques

a screening period,

therefore, would introduce
have
additional delay to the caller. Due to the recording of the
caller’s voice during the screening, in the US, some states
require explicit consent of
recording the conversation,
which could hinder the screening process or invoke privacy
fears from some legitimate callers. As telephone audio
can be manipulated, and tends to contain artifacts such as
background noise, network dropouts, or compression losses,
Voice Interactive Screening techniques are generally more
prone to errors.

Audio Fingerprinting uses the voice recording of the
caller, or audio features extracted from the voice recording
of the caller, to analyze for similarity to a set of known
spam call proﬁles. If the voice recording is similar to an
audio stream of a known spam proﬁle, then the call is
classiﬁed as spam. Audio Fingerprinting has been proposed
to combat replayed voice spam in several works [61]–[67].
However, the performance of Audio Fingerprinting depends
on the completeness of spam proﬁles, which is usually not
feasible for a recipient
to collect. Audio Fingerprinting
would usually require a thirty-party to continuously collect
and maintain the known-spam audio proﬁles to ensure
effectiveness. However, a spammer could potentially defeat
the mechanism by dynamically creating variations of the
spam audio message (such as adding audio artifacts or
using personalized messages) to avoid identiﬁcation.

Speech Content Analysis ﬁrst records the caller’s voice,
then makes use of
speech recognition technology to
transcribe the voice into text. The text is then analyzed with
text proﬁles of known spam calls to classify if the call is
spam. As opposed to managing audio recordings, a corpus
of text data is usually much easier to manage. As many spam
calls are simply variations of a call script, a keywords-based
classiﬁcation model could be used against variations of a
same type of spam [68]. However, the effectiveness of this
technique depends on the accuracy of speech recognition,
and of course the effectiveness of the classiﬁcation model.
In practice, automatic speech recognition of telephone voice
is an ongoing research problem [69], which tends to be
prone to errors, and still has several years to go to reach
human-level performance [70].

Acoustic Pattern Analysis extracts distinguishing acoustic
patterns from the caller’s audio stream, such as signal
losses [71], peak uniformity [71], noise uniformity [71],
voice activity [72], [73], and double talks [72]–[74],
to
determine if the call is spam. Audio Fingerprinting looks
for general patterns in the audio signal that can broadly
distinguish spam calls from legitimate calls. Unlike Audio
Fingerprinting and Speech Content Analysis, Acoustic
Pattern Analysis does not require a large collection of
known-spam proﬁles, which could be difﬁcult to gather and

327327

maintain. However, some patterns may be prone to false
positives and could be easily defeated with manipulation of
the audio stream.

is

an interactive

CAPTCHA/Turing Test
challenge-
response technique that requires the caller to complete a
reverse Turing test to determine whether the caller is a
human or robocaller. The tests are designed to be difﬁcult
for a computer but easy for a human to complete. For
instance, the test could ask the caller to key in what they
hear from a distorted audio stream of random numbers [75]–
[77]. However, CAPTCHA/Turing Test would need to be
careful not to discriminate against certain groups of people,
such as people with poor English or disabilities, while
not giving too much leeway for abuse by “decaptcha"
systems [78]. On the other hand, CAPTCHA/Turing Test
would also need to be careful not
to be illegible even
for users with no handicaps, as the legitimate caller may
become irritated by the obstacles of initiating a call with
the recipient. Because CAPTCHA/Turing Test
is highly
interactive, it tends to require a high degree of effort, and
cause signiﬁcant delays to the caller.

C. Caller Compliance

Caller Compliance is a category of techniques that require
the caller to ﬁrst satisfy a compliance requirement prior
to or during a call request. If the caller is able to satisfy
the compliance requirement, then the caller is allowed to
communicate with the recipient. Satisfying the requirements
should be easy for a legitimate caller but difﬁcult (or
costly) for a spammer. Some compliance measures require
special changes made to the call setup process or to the
communicating terminals. Some techniques require prior
instructions given to the caller.

to substantial ﬁnes if they fail

Do Not Call Registry simply provides a registry of
phone numbers that spammers are legally prohibited from
calling in most circumstances. The spammer may be
subject
to comply. The
registry is usually maintained by the national government,
in the US [22],
is maintained by the Federal
Trade Commission. However, the recipients would need to
actively provide feedbacks for the government to legally act
on spammers violating the law. The Do Not Call Registry
can act as a good deterrence for domestic law-abiding
telemarketers, however it would have little effectiveness on
spoofed numbers and overseas spammers.

the list

Graylisting [79] ﬁrst rejects the initial call request from a
caller and then accepts the next call request from the same
caller made within a short period of time. This technique
defends against autodialers that simply call a list of phone
numbers and do not make repeated call attempts. The

328328

legitimate business,

technique also assumes that if an uninformed (about the
defense) caller is calling about
the
caller will
try again. The implementation is simple and
does not require changes to the infrastructure. However,
the legitimate caller must make two calls for every call
request, which introduces additional delay and calling cost.
A spammer could easily defeat the Graylisting mechanism
by conﬁguring the autodialer to automatically call again
if a call goes unanswered, but at the cost of higher phone
bills and reduced efﬁciency.

Consent-based Communication ﬁrst requires the caller to
send a consent request to the recipient before initiating a
call. For instance, the request could be a forwarded greeting
message where an answering machine ﬁrst records the
name spoken with the caller’s voice and then plays it to
the recipient [80]–[82]. The recipient then decides whether
to accept the caller’s request to communicate. If the call
is spam,
is only limited to being exposed
to an abridged recording (or the request message) of the
spam call. However, the recipient is still disturbed for every
unconsented caller,
is not scalable, and the
recipient is not spared from the disturbance of a spam call.
It also adds delay to each call, as legitimate callers are
forced to wait for consent before each call.

the recipient

therefore it

Call Back Veriﬁcation ﬁrst rejects an initial call from
a caller, then forces the caller to wait for the recipient
to call back the caller. Call Back Veriﬁcation is a good
defense against caller ID spooﬁng, as it forces the caller
to provide a genuine caller ID. The basic mechanism is
simple, and some implementations try to automate this
process [83], [84]. However, it requires the caller to ﬁrst
own a reachable inbound number, which could restrict
communication from legitimate VoIP users and telephone
extension terminals. Call Back Veriﬁcation also add delays
to each communication, as the legitimate caller must wait
for the recipient to call back. Calling back could also add
calling cost on both the caller and recipient in PSTN, which
can be especially signiﬁcant for premium or international
numbers.

caller

Information requires

Weakly Secret
the
to
demonstrate knowledge of a weakly secret
information
before allowing communication with the recipient. Weakly
secret
information could be in various forms such as a
passcode, an extension code, a limited-use phone number,
or a message identiﬁer [85]. However, the recipient would
ﬁrst need to share the weakly secret
information to all
trusted callers, hence it may not be scalable for a recipient
with a large contact list. Legitimate calls from unknown
callers would also be restricted from communicating with
the recipient.

Payment at Risk is a micropayment, cost-based, technique
where the caller is required to deposit a small amount
of money before making a call. If the recipient reports
that the call is spam, then the deposit is conﬁscated or
kept by the recipient, otherwise the money is refunded
to the caller. This was proposed as a method for SIP
spam prevention [38]. This technique prevents spamming
by making it prohibitively expensive to send out a
large amount of spam calls, while costing very little
for legitimate callers. However,
the solution requires a
universal micropayment system that collects payment on
every call, which may require signiﬁcant resources to create
and administer. There also are many questions regarding
the legality of this approach, for instance on the lawful
conﬁscation of payments and abuse of spam reporting. The
value amount of the deposit would also affect the number of
recipients needed to report on the spam caller to effectively
make spamming unproﬁtable.

Proof of Work is a computational, cost-based, technique
where the caller’s terminal is required to produce a proof-
of-work, such as hashcash [86], that is moderately hard to
compute (being computational or memory-bound) but easy
for the recipient to verify, before allowing communication
with the recipient. As the amount of work increases,
it would be prohibitively inefﬁcient
to distribute large
amounts of spam calls. A legitimate caller would not be
signiﬁcantly affected for making a few number of calls. On
one hand, Proof of Work has an advantage over Payment
at Risk by not requiring a micropayment system, therefore
avoiding the administrative and legality issues. On the other
hand, Proof of Work faces a trade-off problem between
permissiveness and anti-spam effectiveness. In PSTN, due
to the signiﬁcant share of low-end telephone terminals, the
difﬁculty of the work would need to be low enough to
ensure permissiveness. However, this may allow a spammer
using moderately powerful computerized terminals to easily
generate as much work as needed for spamming. Legitimate
callers with high outbound calls, such as a bank, may
also be obstructed from doing legitimate business if it
is prohibitively costly to generate the proof-of-works to
contact a large number of customers.

Proof of Identity requires the caller to send a veriﬁable
identity token that would authenticate the credentials of
the caller whenever making a call. This technique has
been proposed for SIP domain users [83], [87]–[89], due
to the availability of SSL/TLS certiﬁcates and maturity of
the underlying public key infrastructure. This technique
prevents spamming by ensuring that the caller could be held
responsible for making illegal calls, and prevents scams by
ensuring that the caller cannot impersonate as someone else.
Proof of Identity could also prevent a spammer from using
multiple identities when identity veriﬁcation is required.

Proof of Identity has an advantage over Proof of Work by
not having the issue of deciding the right difﬁculty level
of proof-of-work which could either obstruct calls from
low-end telephone terminals or give too much leeway for
spamming. However, the scheme could be hard to deploy
in PSTN, as it would require establishment of a certiﬁcate
authority for issuing and verifying caller identities, and may
require signiﬁcant changes to the call request protocols in
PSTN.

V. ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

It is clear that there is no shortage of techniques to combat
telephone spam, but what would an ideal telephone spam
defense entail? Therefore, we propose a set of assessment
criteria.

We separate the assessment criteria into three categories:
(1) Usability, which evaluates the ease-of-use from either
the caller or recipient’s perspective, (2) Deployability, which
evaluates the ease of installation, deployment, and opera-
tion, and (3) Robustness, which evaluates the technique’s
resilience against errors and effectiveness against a spammer
actively evading the defense. We deﬁne each of the identiﬁed
criteria and give a mnemonic name.

A. Usability Criteria
No-Disturbance-to-Recipient When a known-spam call
arrives, the technique does not disturb the recipient, such
as prompting for additional action from the recipient.

Scalable-for-Recipient The technique does not increase the
burden of work on the recipient with an increasing number
of spam calls. The technique can handle a large variety of
spam calls with minimal input from the recipient.

Effortless-for-Caller When initiating a call, the technique
requires minimal or zero effort from the caller.

Negligible-Changes-to-Call-Setups The technique requires
negligible
existing
or
conﬁgurations in the callers’ terminals.

changes

setups

to

the

call

Negligible-Delays When initiating a call,
the technique
adds negligible or unperceivable delay to the caller, other
than the typical time to connect and time waiting for the
recipient to answer the phone.

Permissive-for-VoIP-Callers The
technique would not
restrict any legitimate calls that use VoIP service. For
instance, some outbound-only VoIP users (such as Skype)
tend to have a generic (or unavailable) caller ID number
and cannot receive incoming PSTN calls.

329329

Permissive-for-Unknown-Callers The technique would not
restrict calls from a legitimate caller not known by the
recipient.

conﬁgured to call again later if the call was not answered
by a human, or to deliver the audio message into the
recipient’s voicemail.

B. Deployability Criteria
Negligible-Changes-to-Infrastructure The technique requires
zero or negligible changes to existing PSTN protocols,
terminals, or infrastructure.

No-Third-Party-Involvement The technique does not require
a third-party. A compromise of the third-party would not
result in mishandled calls or in a breach of privacy.

Low-Resource-Requirement The technique is lightweight
and does not require a signiﬁcant amount of resources (e.g.,
people, equipment, engineering, or funding) to initiate and
deploy.

Low-Maintenance The technique requires low maintenance,
in terms of administrative cost,
to
maintain good working order.

resources,

time, or

Negligible-Cost-per-Call The technique adds negligible
cost to each call, taxed on the legitimate caller, recipient,
third-party, or carriers. The cost could also be indirect, such
as reduced efﬁciency or capacity.

C. Robustness Criteria
Effective-Against-Dynamic-Caller-ID-Spooﬁng
technique is
different caller IDs nondeterministically.

robust even when the spammer

The
spoofs

The
Effective-Against-Targeted-Caller-ID-Spooﬁng
technique is robust even when the spammer spoofs a
speciﬁc caller ID known to be trusted by the recipient.

technique
Effective-Against-Unavailable-Caller-ID The
is robust even when the spammer makes the caller ID
unavailable or sends a faulty caller ID to cause errors.

Effective-Against-Multiple-Identities The technique is robust
even when the spammer initiate calls from multiple sources,
such as using multiple subscriber accounts or a telephone
botnet, to disseminate spam calls. This is different from
caller ID spooﬁng where the caller IDs are not necessarily
spoofed but are instead initiated from different sources.

The
Effective-Against-Answering-Machine-Detection
technique is robust even when the spammer uses Answering
Machine Detection technology, which is a feature in
autodialers that can distinguish human pick-ups from
answering machines. With AMD, an autodialer can be

Effective-Against-Dynamic-Audio-Content The technique is
robust even when the spammer uses an autodialer capable
of personalizing or altering the audio messages for different
recipients. This is usually featured in autodialers that are
able to synthesize text to speech.

We evaluate each technique using the criteria proposed in
Section V, and Table I visually summarizes this evaluation.
Each technique is evaluated as either satisfying the criteria

(denoted as (cid:2)), may satisfy the criteria (denoted as (cid:3)(cid:4)), or
not satisfying the criteria (denoted as (cid:4)). “May satisfy the

criteria” means that the technique can be made to satisfy the
criteria depending on the implementation or conﬁguration,
while some implementations do not fully satisfy the criteria.
Of course, this analysis requires some opinion, and in each
case we evaluated each technique and criteria to the best
of our abilities. While others may disagree with the exact
assessment of each technique, we believe that the criteria
outlined in Section V will help to guide future telephone
spam defenses and to provide a framework to evaluate these
defenses.

VI. COMBINING TECHNIQUES

From analyzing all the standalone techniques, it is clear
that there is no single technique that can satisfy all the
criteria. Therefore, an improved anti-spam system would
look to combine different
to leverage the
positives and compensate the negatives. We outline the
different ways in which a solution could use a combination
of standalone techniques.

techniques,

Phased Decisions combine several techniques into a linear
sequence (i.e., a pipeline process) of decision stages. If
an earlier technique determines the call is spam, then it
may not be necessary to run the evaluation techniques
at later stages. This is suitable for combining techniques
that uses information that are obtained chronologically,
such as ﬁrst using Call Request Header Analysis, followed
by Voice Interactive Screening. We found use of Phased
Decisions approach in related works by Niccolini and
Quitek et al. [96], [97], Schlegel et al. [98], Gritzalis and
Mallios [99], [100], and Azad and Morla [39].

Weighted Scoring combines several techniques by running
each technique individually and then combining the outputs
to produce a ﬁnal score by applying a weighted scoring
method. The classiﬁcation of whether the call
is spam
is based on the ﬁnal score. As Weighted Scoring need
to collect outputs from all standalone techniques,
is
suitable for combining techniques that can be performed

it

330330

Usability

Deployability

Robustness

t
n
e
i
p
i
c
e
R
-
o
t
-
e
c
n
a
b
r
u
t
s
i
D
-
o
References N

t
n
e
i
p
i
c
e
R
-
r
o
f
-
e
l
b
a
l
a
c
S

r
e
l
l
a
C
-
r
o
f
-
s
s
e
l
t
r
o
f
f

E

s
y
a
l
e
D
-
e
l
b
i
g
i
l
g
e
N

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n
I
-
o
t
-
s
e
g
n
a
h
C
-
e
l
b
i
g
i
l
g
e
N

s
p
u
t
e
S
-
l
l
a
C
-
o
t
-
s
e
g
n
a
h
C
-
e
l
b
i
g
i
l
g
e
N

s
r
e
l
l
a
C
-
n
w
o
n
k
n
U
-
r
o
f
-
e
v
i
s
s
i
m
r
e
P

s
r
e
l
l
a
C
-
P
I
o
V
-
r
o
f
-
e
v
i
s
s
i
m
r
e
P

t
n
e
m
e
v
l
o
v
n
I
-
y
t
r
a
P
-
d
r
i
h
T
-
o
N

t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
R
-
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
R
-
w
o
L

l
l
a
C
-
r
e
p
-
t
s
o
C
-
e
l
b
i
g
i
l
g
e
N

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
i
a
M
w
o
L

-

g
n
ﬁ
o
o
p
S
-
D

I
-
r
e
l
l
a
C
-
c
i
m
a
n
y
D

-
t
s
n
i
a
g
A
-
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

g
n
ﬁ
o
o
p
S
-
D

I
-
r
e
l
l
a
C
-
d
e
t
e
g
r
a
T
-
t
s
n
i
a
g
A
-
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

E

D

I
-
r
e
l
l
a
C
-
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
n
U

-
t
s
n
i
a
g
A
-
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

s
e
i
t
i
t
n
e
d
I
-
e
l
p
i
t
l
u
M

-
t
s
n
i
a
g
A
-
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
D
-
e
n
i
h
c
a
M
-
g
n
i
r
e
w
s
n
A
-
t
s
n
i
a
g
A
-
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

E

t
n
e
t
n
o
C
-
o
i
d
u
A
-
c
i
m
a
n
y
D

-
t
s
n
i
a
g
A
-
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

E

Call Request Header Analysis

Voice Interactive Screening

Caller Compliance

E

E

E

Caller ID Blacklisting
Caller ID Whitelisting
Caller Reputation System

[24], [25] (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[26], [27] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[28]–[42], [90] (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
Caller Behavior Analysis [29], [32], [33], [35], [39], [41], [43]–[54], [91], [92] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[55] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[56], [57] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[58] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[58] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[61]–[67] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4)
[62], [68] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4)
[71]–[74] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4)
[75]–[77] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[22] (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[74], [79] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[80]–[82] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[83], [84] (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[85] (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[38] (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[86], [93]–[95] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
[83], [87]–[89] (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)

Device Fingerprinting
Caller ID Anomaly Detection
ANI-CPN Matching
ANI-II Filtering
Audio Fingerprinting
Speech Content Analysis
Acoustic Pattern Analysis
CAPTCHA/Turing Test
Do Not Call Registry
Graylisting
Consent-based Communication
Call Back Veriﬁcation
Weakly Secret Information
Payment at Risk
Proof of Work
Proof of Identity

(cid:2)= satisfy the criteria (cid:3)(cid:4)= may satisfy the criteria (cid:4)= does not satisfy the criteria

Table I: Evaluation of various standalone techniques against the criteria described in Section V.

such as

the various

standalone Call
simultaneously,
Request Header Analysis techniques. We found use of
Weighted Scoring approach in related works by Dantu and
Kolan [101], Niccolini and Quitek et al. [96], [97], Schlegel
et al. [98], Hansen et al. [102], and Mathieu et al. [103].

Conditional Procedures combine several techniques based
on a predeﬁned set of rules (i.e., a policy or an algorithm).
This allows for higher ﬂexibility of combining the tech-
niques, such as using a different sequence of standalone
techniques based on the preference of each recipient or
the reputation of each caller. We found use of Conditional
Procedures approach in related works by d’Heureuse et
al. [104], Dritsas et al. [105], Scata and La Corte [106],
and Soupionis and Gritzalis [47].

We evaluate existing solutions using a combined ap-
proach, and summarized which standalone techniques those
solutions incorporated in Table II. All of these works are
mainly focused on defense against SPIT, and some of these
may include SPIT-speciﬁc techniques that does not appear

331331

in our table. Again, this analysis requires some opinion, and
we evaluated each solution to the best of our abilities. We
believe that the various strategies of combining techniques
outlined in Section VI will help to improve future telephone
spam defenses.

VII. RELATED WORK

While in this paper we have compared and analyzed the
state-of-the-art research in telephone spam defense, we will
now discuss related survey papers. Most of the papers focus
on spam in the Voice over IP (VoIP) domain, so-called SPam
over Internet Telephony (SPIT), rather than the larger PSTN
telephony network.

Keromytis [107], [108] presented two comprehensive sur-
veys of VoIP security, which summarized previous works
related to VoIP security and organized them according to an
extended version of the VoIP Security Alliance (VoIPSA)
Threat Taxonomy. The papers reviewed many previous
works addressing every type VoIP threat in the VoIPSA
taxonomy, with the social threats of spamming as one of
the categories.

Phased Decisions
Weighted Scoring
Conditional Procedures
Caller ID Blacklisting
Caller ID Whitelisting
Caller Reputation System
Caller Behavior Analysis
Device Fingerprinting
Caller ID Anomaly Detection
ANI-CPN Matching
ANI-II Filtering
Audio Fingerprinting
Speech Content Analysis
Acoustic Pattern Analysis
CAPTCHA/Turing Test
Do Not Call Registry
Graylisting
Consent-based Communication
Call Back Veriﬁcation
Weakly Secret Information
Payment at Risk
Proof of Work
Proof of Identity

[98]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

[96], [97]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[100]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[99]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[101]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[102]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[103]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[104]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

[106]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

[105]

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Table II: Summary of various anti-spam solutions using a combination of standalone techniques.

Baumann et al. [109] presented a survey of potential
solutions to SPIT. The paper provided an overview and
classiﬁcation of SPIT prevention methods based on detec-
tion using Signaling versus Voice and order-based Before
Call versus After/While Call. The paper also proposed a
Biometric Framework for SPIT Prevention as a way to bind
identities to each caller.

Phithakkitnukoon et al. [110] presented a survey focused
on ﬁve primary types of VoIP attacks, SPIT being one of
them. The authorized provided an introduction to the basic
knowledge of VoIP systems and its available security tools,
and summarized a list of proposed solutions for SPIT from
previous literature.

Quinten et al. [111] presented a survey evaluating the
techniques to prevent and reduce SPIT. The authors eval-
uated the effectiveness of techniques by dividing them into
four categories: unsuitable techniques, techniques with po-
tential, suitable techniques, and combinations of techniques.
Dantu et al. [112] presented a survey discussing the
attacks and solutions in VoIP, with VoIP Spam and Phishing
being one of the attacks. The authors reviewed previous
work addressing all types of VoIP attacks and proposed a
high-level security architecture to make the VoIP infrastruc-
ture more secure and robust.

Dritsas et al. [113] presented a survey reviewing a list
of SPIT identiﬁcation criteria that can be used by anti-SPIT
mechanisms and identiﬁed the different detection stages. The
authors propose two generic categories of SPIT identiﬁcation

criteria: SIP Message criteria and SIP User Agent criteria.
They also proposed a two-fold evaluation framework for
discovering possible SPIT messages.

Marias et al. [114] presented a survey assessing the
threats and vulnerabilities that the SIP protocol introduces.
The authors also reviewed existing anti-SPIT mechanisms
and classiﬁed them into three classes: Prevent, Detect, and
Handle. The paper also proposes a list of qualitative and
quantitative criteria to assess the effectiveness of the anti-
SPIT countermeasures.

Khan et al. [115] presented a survey reviewing various
existing methods for preventing spam in IP telephony. The
paper also presented a discussion on the implementation
costs of different types of techniques, and commented that
no single technique is sufﬁcient and therefore a framework
of multiple techniques is recommended.

Rosenberg et al. [116] presented an open memo reviewing
various solutions that might be possible to deal with SIP
spam. The author also presented some borrowed techniques
that have been employed to deal with email spam. In
conclusion, the author recommends using identity related
techniques, while also commented that identity techniques
may be vulnerable when a SIP request without an authenti-
cated identity cannot know whether the request lacked such
an identity because the originating domain didn’t support it,
or because a man-in-the-middle removed it.

In general, most existing survey papers focus on tech-
niques against SPIT or more speciﬁcally spam in the SIP

332332

protocol. This paper is focused on techniques to address
spamming in the PSTN telephony network. Some techniques
for SPIT are not applicable to PSTN due to protocol dif-
ferences. As far as we are aware, this is the ﬁrst survey
paper speciﬁcally addressing spam calls directed to the
PSTN telephony network. In terms of evaluation differences,
we are the ﬁrst
to propose a taxonomy to classify the
existing standalone techniques into three categories, the ﬁrst
to evaluate the standalone techniques based on three sets of
assessment criteria, and the ﬁrst to outline the three strategies
of combining standalone techniques.

VIII. CONCLUSION

From analyzing and evaluating the existing solutions that
attempt to address telephone spam, we reach the conclusion
that there is no universally acceptable solution to telephone
spam. Every approach thus far has different tradeoffs, specif-
ically between usability, deployability, and robustness.

From our analysis of the telephone spam ecosystem and
defensive techniques, we believe that usability is the most
important criteria for evaluating a defense. Unlike email,
which can be delayed or possibly lost due to a false positive,
telephony solutions have a high bar for user acceptance,
and we believe that users will not adopt techniques that
impose excessive burden on both the caller and recipient.
Therefore, future research into this area must consider the
usability of the defense from both the caller and the recipient
perspective.

We believe that one promising avenue of research is
using a combination of techniques, which should improve
on the robustness of standalone techniques, and potentially
each technique could address the weaknesses of the others.
However, as the telephony system has real-time immediacy
constraints, care must be taken so that the combination of
techniques will not degrade the user experience due to higher
complexity. Our intuition leads us to recommend combining
no more than two standalone techniques, as we observed that
a good balance of usability, deployability, and robustness
could be achieved by using two standalone techniques.

One glaring issue that continually reoccurs when analyz-
ing the telephone spam ecosystem is caller ID spooﬁng. We
believe that the key to combating telephone spam is to make
the caller ID trusted and veriﬁable, while making minimal
changes to existing infrastructure. For instance, from our
evaluation of Call Request Header Analysis techniques,
they provide the best overall usability and deployability,
however they suffer from robustness due to the spammer’s
ability to spoof the caller ID. If caller ID spooﬁng can
be effectively prevented, then we believe that Call Request
Header Analysis would satisfy all of our evaluation criteria.
Telephone spam is poised to increase signiﬁcantly,
defrauding consumers of billions of dollars. Therefore, an
effective telephone spam defense is critical. However, the
techniques and approaches that were effective in combating

333333

email spam are inappropriate when applied to telephone
spam. We attribute this to differences not only in the
technology used, but more fundamentally to the type of
communication. This is why a survey of the telephone
spam area is necessary: to highlight these differences and
to deﬁne the ideal criteria for telephone spam defenses. We
hope that this paper provides a framework to help guide
and shape future telephone spam defenses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was partially supported by the grants from
Cisco Inc. and Center for Cybersecurity and Digital Foren-
sics at ASU.

REFERENCES

[1] CTIA,

“Annual

Wireless

Industry

Survey,”

http://www.ctia.org/your-wireless-life/how-wireless-
works/annual-wireless-industry-survey.

[2] U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “American time use survey
fact sheet,” http://www.bls.gov/tus/atussummary.pdf, June
2015.

book

[3] Federal Trade Commission, “National do not call registry
data
https://www.ftc.gov/system/ﬁles/
documents/reports/national-do-not-call-registry-data-book-
ﬁscal-year-2014/dncdatabookfy2014.pdf,
Federal Trade
Commission, Tech. Rep., 2015.

2014,”

fy

[4] Federal Trade Commission, “Consumer sentinel data book
for
january - december cy 2014,” https://www.ftc.gov/
system/ﬁles/documents/reports/consumer-sentinel-network-
data-book-january-december-2014/sentinel-cy2014-1.pdf,
Federal Trade Commission, Tech. Rep., 2015.

[5] S. H. Kimball, T. Levy, H. Venturelli, and S. Miller, “Inter-
active Voice Recognition Communication in Electoral Poli-
tics: Exploratory Metadata Analysis,” American Behavioral
Scientist, 2014.

[6] A. R. Modarressi and R. Skoog, “Signaling System No. 7:

A Tutorial,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 1990.

[7] International Telecommunication Union, “Fixed-telephone
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/

subscriptions,”
Documents/statistics/2014/Fixed_tel_2000-2013.xls.

[8] Statista,

“Countries

Internet Protocol
http://www.statista.com/statistics/236824/number-of-voip-
subscribers-by-leading-countries/.

in

number
subscribers

of Voice

over
1Q 2013,”

by
(VoIP)

[9] B. Woodcock and V. Adhikari, “Survey of Characteristics of
Internet Carrier Interconnection Agreements,” Packet Clear-
ing House, Tech. Rep., 2011.

[10] Federal

Communications

compensation,”
intercarrier-compensation, 2015.

Commission,

“Intercarrier
https://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/

[11] P. Casanova, R. Bandyopadhyay, and V. Balasubramaniyan,
“Largest IRS Phone Scam Likely Exceeded 450,000 Poten-
tial Victims in March,” http://www.pindropsecurity.com/irs-
phone-scam-live-call_analysis/, 2015.

[12] Marketwired,

Breaks Down

“From Stalkers

to Spam, WhitePages
Block
http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/from-

Study
Calls,”
stalkers-to-spam-whitepages-study-breaks-down-reasons-
americans-block-calls-1900134.htm.

Reasons Americans

[13] C. A. Hamilton, “Machine answer detection,” Dec. 6 1994,

uS Patent 5,371,787.

[14] T. Mobarak and A. Han, “Method and apparatus for forcing
a call to a carrier provided voice mail facility,” 2013, uS
Patent 8,605,869.

[15] Federal Communications Commission, “Calling Number

Identiﬁcation Service–Caller ID,” 2015.

[16] C. Business, “PRI Trunk Plans,” http://business.comcast.

com/phone/pri-trunks/plans-pricing.

[17] E. Park, “Rustock Takedown’s Effect on Global Spam
Volume,” http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/rustock-
takedown-s-effect-global-spam-volume, 2011.

[18] M. Carney, “Courts deem CallFire a common carrier,
setting a major precedent at
telecom
and tech law,” http://pando.com/2015/02/27/courts-deem-
callﬁre-a-common-carrier-setting-a-major-precedent-at-
intersection-of-telecom-and-tech-law/, Feb. 27, 2015.

intersection of

Phone
http:

“FTC: Totally

[19] K. Cox,
Companies
//consumerist.com/2015/01/27/ftc-totally-ﬁne-by-us-if-
phone-companies-block-robocalling-numbers/,
Jan.
2015.

If
Numbers,”

Fine By Us

Robocalling

Block

[27] NQ Mobile Security, “NQ Mobile Call Blocker,” http://en.

nq.com/callblocker.

[28] P. Kolan and R. Dantu, “Socio-technical defense against
voice spamming,” ACM Transactions on Autonomous and
Adaptive Systems (TAAS), vol. 2, no. 1, p. 2, 2007.

[29] F. Wang, Y. Mo, and B. Huang, “P2p-avs: P2p based cooper-
ative voip spam ﬁltering,” in Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference, 2007. WCNC 2007. IEEE.
IEEE,
2007, pp. 3547–3552.

[30] P. Patankar, G. Nam, G. Kesidis, and C. R. Das, “Exploring
anti-spam models in large scale voip systems,” in Distributed
Computing Systems, 2008. ICDCS’08. The 28th Interna-
tional Conference on.

IEEE, 2008, pp. 85–92.

[31] R. Zhang and A. Gurtov, “Collaborative reputation-based
voice spam ﬁltering,” in Database and Expert Systems
Application, 2009. DEXA’09. 20th International Workshop
on.

IEEE, 2009, pp. 33–37.

[32] C. Sorge and J. Seedorf, “A provider-level reputation system
for assessing the quality of spit mitigation algorithms,” in
Communications, 2009. ICC’09. IEEE International Con-
ference on.

IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–6.

[33] V. B. Payas Gupta, Bharat Srinivasan and M. Ahamad,
“Phoneypot: Data-driven Understanding of Telephony
Threats,” in Proceedings of the Symposium on Network and
Distributed System Security (NDSS).

[34] P. Kolan, R. Dantu, and J. W. Cangussu, “Nuisance level of
a voice call,” ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing,
Communications, and Applications (TOMM), vol. 5, no. 1,
p. 6, 2008.

27,

[35] T. S. Corporation, “Nomorobo,” https://www.nomorobo.

com.

[20] Federal Communications Commission, “Telephone con-
sumer protection act 47 u.s.c. Â˘g 227,” https://transition.fcc.
gov/cgb/policy/TCPA-Rules.pdf.

[21] Public Law 111â ˘A¸S331 111th Congress, “Truth in caller id
act of 2009,” https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ331/
PLAW-111publ331.pdf.

[22] Federal Trade Commission, “National Do Not Call Reg-

istry,” https://www.donotcall.gov/.

[23] Federal Trade Commission, “Robocalls | consumer informa-
tion,” https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/features/feature-0025-
robocalls, 2015.

[24] E. Montejo,

“How to block phone

calls on your
Android phone,” http://www.androidauthority.com/how-to-
block-phone-calls-numbers-android-phone-246484/.

[25] Apple Inc., “Block calls and block or ﬁlter messages on your
iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch,” https://support.apple.com/en-
us/HT201229.

[26] T. Nimmerjahn,

“Whitelist Call Blocker,”

https:

//play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=de.tn_software.
callblocker.

[36] K. Srivastava and H. G. Schulzrinne, “Preventing spam for

sip-based instant messages and sessions,” 2004.

[37] Y. Rebahi and D. Sisalem, “Sip service providers and the
spam problem,” in Proceedings of the 2nd VoIP Security
Workshop, 2005.

[38] Y. Rebahi, D. Sisalem, and T. Magedanz, “Sip spam de-
tection,” in Digital Telecommunications„ 2006. ICDT’06.
International Conference on.

IEEE, 2006, pp. 68–68.

[39] M. A. Azad and R. Morla, “Multistage spit detection in tran-
sit voip,” in Software, Telecommunications and Computer
Networks (SoftCOM), 2011 19th International Conference
on.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–9.

[40] M. A. Azad, R. Morla, “Caller-rep: Detecting unwanted calls
with caller social strength,” Computers & Security, vol. 39,
pp. 219–236, 2013.

[41] Y.-S. Wu, S. Bagchi, N. Singh, and R. Wita, “Spam detection
in voice-over-ip calls through semi-supervised clustering,” in
Dependable Systems & Networks, 2009. DSN’09. IEEE/IFIP
International Conference on.

IEEE, 2009, pp. 307–316.

334334

[42] F. Wang, F. R. Wang, B. Huang, and L. T. Yang, “Advs:
a reputation-based model on ﬁltering spit over p2p-voip
networks,” The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 64, no. 3,
pp. 744–761, 2013.

[55] H. Yan, K. Sripanidkulchai, H. Zhang, Z.-Y. Shae, and
D. Saha, “Incorporating active ﬁngerprinting into spit
prevention systems,” in Third annual security workshop
(VSWâ ˘A ´Z06). Citeseer, 2006.

[43] D. Shin, J. Ahn, and C. Shim, “Progressive Multi Gray-
Leveling: A Voice Spam Protection Algorithm,” IEEE Net-
work, 2006.

[44] H.-J. Kim, M. J. Kim, Y. Kim, and H. C. Jeong, “Devs-based
modeling of voip spam callersâ ˘A ´Z behavior for spit level
calculation,” Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory,
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 569–584, 2009.

[45] M.-Y. Su and C.-H. Tsai, “A prevention system for spam
over internet telephony,” Appl. Math, vol. 6, no. 2S, pp.
579S–585S, 2012.

[46] M. Amanian, M. Moghaddam, and H. Roshkhari, “New
method for evaluating anti-SPIT in VoIP networks,” in
Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE), 2013 3th
International eConference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 374–379.

[47] Y. Soupionis and D. Gritzalis, “Aspf: Adaptive anti-spit
policy-based framework,” in Availability, Reliability and
Security (ARES), 2011 Sixth International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 153–160, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ARES.
2011.29.

[48] N. Chaisamran, T. Okuda, and S. Yamaguchi, “Trust-based
voip spam detection based on calling behaviors and human
relationships,” Information and Media Technologies, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 528–537, 2013.

[49] R. J. B. Chikha, T. Abbes, W. B. Chikha, and A. Bouhoula,
“Behavior-based approach to detect spam over IP tele-
phony attacks,” International Journal of Information Secu-
rity, 2015.

[50] H. Sengar, X. Wang, and A. Nichols, “Call Behavioral anal-
ysis to Thwart SPIT attacks on VoIP networks,” in Security
and Privacy in Communication Networks. Springer, 2012,
pp. 501–510.

[56] EveryCaller, “Call Control,” http://www.everycaller.com.

[57] Budaloop, “Regex Call Blocker,” https://play.google.com/

store/apps/details?id=com.budaloop.regexblocker.

[58] Pindrop Security, “Fraud Detection System,” http://www.

pindropsecurity.com/fraud-detection-system.

[59] S. J. Brolin and S. Colodner, “Automatic number identiﬁ-
cation in subscriber loop carrier systems,” Nov. 1 1977, uS
Patent 4,056,690.

[60] I. Neustar, “Nanpa : Ani

- view assign-
ments,” https://www.nationalnanpa.com/number_resource_
info/ani_ii_assignments.html, 2015.

ii digits

[61] S. Horvath and T. Kasvand, “Voice identiﬁcation pre-
screening and redirection system,” Sep. 6 2002, uS Patent
App. 10/236,810.

[62] D. Reich and R. Szabo, “Method and system of deter-
mining unsolicited callers,” Apr. 28 2004, uS Patent App.
10/833,515.

[63] C. Pörschmann and H. Knospe, “Analysis of Spectral Pa-
rameters of Audio Signals for the Identiﬁcation of Spam
Over IP Telephony.” in CEAS, 2008.

[64] C. Pörschmann and H. Knospe, “Spectral Analysis of Audio
Signals for the Identiﬁcation of Spam Over IP Telephony,”
in Proceedings of the NAG/DAGA International Conference
on Acoustics, 2009.

[65] D. Lentzen, G. Grutzek, H. Knospe, and C. Porschmann,
“Content-based Detection and Prevention of Spam over
IP Telephony-System Design, Prototype and First Results,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), 2011.

[51] H. J. Kang, Z.-L. Zhang, S. Ranjan, and A. Nucci, “Sip-
based voip trafﬁc behavior proﬁling and its applications,” in
Proceedings of the 3rd annual ACM workshop on Mining
network data. ACM, 2007, pp. 39–44.

[66] J. Strobl, B. Mainka, G. Grutzek, and H. Knospe, “An Efﬁ-
cient Search Method for the Content-Based Identiﬁcation of
Telephone-SPAM,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), 2012.

[52] Y. Bai, X. Su, and B. Bhargava, “Adaptive Voice Spam
Control with User Behavior Analysis,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on High Performance
Computing and Communications (HPCC), 2009.

[53] R. MacIntosh and D. Vinokurov, “Detection and mitigation
of spam in IP telephony networks using signaling protocol
analysis,” in Advances in Wired and Wireless Communica-
tion, 2005 IEEE/Sarnoff Symposium on.
IEEE, 2005, pp.
49–52.

[54] S. Phithakkitnukoon, R. Dantu, R. Claxton, and N. Eagle,
“Behavior-based adaptive call predictor,” ACM Transactions
on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems (TAAS), vol. 6, no. 3,
p. 21, 2011.

[67] S. A. Iranmanesh, H. Sengar, and H. Wang, “A Voice Spam
Filter to Clean Subscribers’ Mailbox,” Security and Privacy
in Communication Networks, 2013.

[68] F. Maggi, “Are the Con Artists Back? A Preliminary Anal-
ysis of Modern Phone Frauds,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer and Information
Technology (CIT), 2010.

[69] L. R. Rabiner, “Applications of speech recognition in the
area of telecommunications,” in Automatic Speech Recog-
nition and Understanding, 1997. Proceedings., 1997 IEEE
Workshop on.

IEEE, 1997, pp. 501–510.

[70] David R. Wheeler, “Voice recognition will always be
http://www.cnn.com/2013/08/20/opinion/wheeler-

stupid,”
voice-recognition/.

335335

[71] V. A. Balasubramaniyan, A. Poonawalla, M. Ahamad,
M. T. Hunter, and P. Traynor, “Pindr0p: Using single-
ended audio features to determine call provenance,” in
Proceedings of
the 17th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’10. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 109–120. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1866307.1866320

[85] K. Ono and H. Schulzrinne, “Have i met you before?: using
cross-media relations to reduce spit,” in Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on Principles, Systems and
Applications of IP Telecommunications. ACM, 2009, p. 3.

[86] A. Back, “Hashcash - A Denial of Service Counter-

Measure,” http://www.hashcash.org/hashcash.pdf, 2002.

[72] H. Hai, Y. Hong-Tao, and F. Xiao-Lei, “A SPIT Detection
Method Using Voice Activity Analysis,” in Proceedings of
the International Conference on Multimedia Information
Networking and Security (MINES), 2009.

[87] H. Tschofenig, R. Falk, J. Peterson, J. Hodges, D. Sicker,
J. Polk, and A. Siemens, “Using saml to protect the session
initiation protocol (sip),” IEEE Network, vol. 20, no. 5, pp.
14–17, 2006.

[73] J. Quittek, S. Niccolini, S. Tartarelli, M. Stiemerling,
M. Brunner, and T. Ewald, “Detecting SPIT calls by check-
ing human communication patterns,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2007.

[74] J. Quittek, S. Niccolini, S. Tartarelli, and R. Schlegel,
“Prevention of Spam over IP Telephony (SPIT),” NEC, Tech.
Rep., 2006.

[75] J. Lindqvist and M. Komu, “Cure for spam over internet tele-
phony,” in 4TH IEEE CONSUMER COMMUNICATIONS
AND NETWORKING CONFERENCE (CCNC 2007). Pro-
ceedingsâ ˘A˛e vol., n, 2007, pp. 896–900.

[76] A. Markkola

and

“Accessible Voice
in Proceedings
the Symposium on Accessible Privacy and Security

Internet Telephony,”

J. Lindqvist,

for

CAPTCHAs
of
(SOAPS), 2008.

[77] Y. Soupionis, G. Tountas, and D. Gritzalis, “Audio
CAPTCHA for SIP-based VoIP,” in Proceedings of Inter-
national Information Security Conference, 2009.

[78] E. Bursztein and S. Bethard, “Decaptcha: Breaking 75% of
eBay Audio CAPTCHAs,” in Proceedings of the USENIX
Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT), 2009.

[79] E. Harris,

“The Next Step in the Spam Control
War: Greylisting,” http://projects.puremagic.com/greylisting/
whitepaper.html, 2003.

[80] Google Voice, “Screen calls,” https://support.google.com/

voice/answer/115083.

[81] Verizon,

“Call

https://www.verizon.com/
support/residential/phone/homephone/calling+features/call+
intercept/130058.htm.

Intercept,”

[82] Phone.com,
for

“Phone.com university
your
line

screening
calls
phone.com,”
https://www.phone.com/blog/tips-tricks/2014/02/24/phone-
com-university-screening-calls-business-line/,
February
2014.

business

â ˘A¸S
|

[83] N. Croft and M. Olivier, “A Model for Spam Prevention
in IP Telephony Networks using Anonymous Verifying Au-
thorities,” in Proceedings of the Annual Information Security
South Africa Conference, 2005.

[84] H. Mustafa, W. Xu, A. R. Sadeghi, and S. Schulz, “You
Can Call but You Can’t Hide: Detecting Caller ID Spooﬁng
Attacks,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks (DSN), 2014.

336336

[88] S. Saklikar and S. Saha, “Identity federation for voip-based
services,” in Proceedings of the 2007 ACM workshop on
Digital identity management. ACM, 2007, pp. 62–71.

[89] L. Kong, V. A. Balasubramaniyan, and M. Ahamad, “A
lightweight scheme for securely and reliably locating sip
users,” in VoIP Management and Security, 2006. 1st IEEE
Workshop on.

IEEE, 2006, pp. 9–17.

[90] V. Balasubramaniyan, M. Ahamad, and H. Park, “Callrank:
Combating spit using call duration, social networks and
global reputation.” in CEAS, 2007.

[91] R. Dantu and P. Kolan, “Preventing voice spamming,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications Con-
ference (GLOBECOM), Workshop on VoIP Security Chal-
lenges and Solutions, 2004.

[92] B. Mathieu, Y. Gourhant, and Q. Loudier, “Spit mitigation
by a network level anti-spit entity,” in Proc. of the 3rd
Annual VoIP Security Workshop, 2006.

[93] C. Dwork and M. Naor, “Pricing via Processing or Com-
batting Junk Mail,” in Advances in Cryptology (CRYPTO),
1992.

[94] N. Banerjee, S. Saklikar, and S. Saha, “Anti-vamming trust
enforcement in peer-to-peer voip networks,” in Proceedings
of the 2006 international conference on Wireless communi-
cations and mobile computing. ACM, 2006, pp. 201–206.

[95] C. Jennings, “Computational puzzles for spam reduction in

sip,” 2007.

[96] S. Niccolini, “Spit prevention: state of the art and research
challenges,” in Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Securing
Voice over IP, 2006.

[97] J. Quittek, S. Niccolini, S. Tartarelli, and R. Schlegel, “On
Spam over Internet Telephony (SPIT) Prevention,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, 2008.

[98] R. Schlegel, S. Niccolini, S. Tartarelli, and M. Brunner,
“Ise03-2: Spam over internet telephony (spit) prevention
framework,” in Global Telecommunications Conference,
2006. GLOBECOM’06. IEEE.

IEEE, 2006, pp. 1–6.

[99] D. Gritzalis and Y. Mallios, “A sip-oriented spit management
framework,” Computers & Security, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 136–
153, 2008.

[100] D. Gritzalis, G. Marias, Y. Rebahi, Y. Soupionis, and
S. Ehlert, “Spider: A platform for managing sip-based spam
over internet telephony spit,” Journal of Computer Security,
vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 835–867, 2011.

[101] R. Dantu and P. Kolan, “Detecting spam in voip networks,”
in Proceedings of the steps to reducing unwanted trafﬁc on
the internet on steps to reducing unwanted trafﬁc on the
internet workshop. USENIX Association, 2005, pp. 5–5.

[102] M. Hansen, M. Hansen, J. Möller, T. Rohwer, C. Tolkmit,
and H. Waack, “Developing a legally compliant reachabil-
ity management system as a countermeasure against spit,”
in Proceedings of Third Annual VoIP Security Workshop,
Berlin, Germany, 2006.

[103] B. Mathieu, S. Niccolini, and D. Sisalem, “SDRS: a voice-
over-IP spam detection and reaction system,” Security &
Privacy, IEEE, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 52–59, 2008.

[104] N. d’Heureuse, J. Seedorf, and S. Niccolini, “A policy
framework for personalized and role-based spit prevention,”
in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Prin-
ciples, Systems and Applications of IP Telecommunications.
ACM, 2009, p. 12.

[105] S. Dritsas, V. Dritsou, B. Tsoumas, P. Constantopoulos, and
D. Gritzalis, “Ontospit: Spit management through ontolo-
gies,” Computer Communications, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 203–
212, 2009.

[106] M. Scatá and A. L. Corte, “Security analysis and counter-
measures assessment against spit attacks on voip systems,”
in Internet Security (WorldCIS), 2011 World Congress on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 177–183.

[107] A. D. Keromytis, “A survey of voice over ip security
research,” in Information Systems Security. Springer, 2009,
pp. 1–17.

[108] Keromytis, Angelos D, “A comprehensive survey of voice
over ip security research,” Communications Surveys & Tu-
torials, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 514–537, 2012.

[109] R. Baumann, S. Cavin, and S. Schmid, “Voice over ip-
security and spit,” Swiss Army, FU Br, vol. 41, pp. 1–34,
2006.

[110] S. Phithakkitnukoon, R. Dantu, and E.-A. Baatarjav, “Voip
securityâ ˘AˇTattacks and solutions,” Information Security
Journal: A Global Perspective, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 114–123,
2008.

[111] V. M. Quinten, R. Van De Meent, and A. Pras, “Analysis
of techniques for protection against spam over internet
telephony,” in Dependable and Adaptable Networks and
Services. Springer, 2007, pp. 70–77.

[112] R. Dantu, S. Fahmy, H. Schulzrinne, and J. Cangussu, “Is-
sues and challenges in securing voip,” computers & security,
vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 743–753, 2009.

[113] S. Dritsas, Y. Soupionis, M. Theoharidou, Y. Mallios, and
D. Gritzalis, “Spit identiﬁcation criteria implementation: Ef-
fectiveness and lessons learned,” in Proceedings of The Iﬁp
Tc 11 23rd International Information Security Conference.
Springer, 2008, pp. 381–395.

[114] G. F. Marias, S. Dritsas, M. Theoharidou, J. Mallios, and
D. Gritzalis, “SIP vulnerabilities and anti-SPIT mechanisms
assessment,” in Computer Communications and Networks,
2007. ICCCN 2007. Proceedings of 16th International Con-
ference on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 597–604, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ICCCN.2007.4317883.

[115] S. F. Khan, M. Portmann, and N. W. Bergmann, “A Review
of Methods for Preventing Spam in IP Telephony,” Modern
Applied Science, vol. 7, no. 7, p. p48, 2013.

[116] J. Rosenberg, C. Jennings, and J. Peterson, “The session
initiation protocol (SIP) and spam,” RFC 5039, January,
Tech. Rep., 2008.

[117] M. W. Slawson and C. I. O. C. Waiting, “Caller ID Basics,”
Intertek Testing Services/Testmark Laboratories, Lexington,
KY, 2001.

337337

APPENDIX

Description
Message Type (MDMF)
Message Length
Parameter Code (Date & Time)
Parameter Length
Month (November)

Day (28)

Hour (3pm)

Minutes (43)

Parameter Code (CPN)
Parameter Length (10)
From (6062241359)

Parameter Code (Name)
Parameter Length (9)
Name (Joe Smith)

Checksum

Decimal
128
33
1
8
49
49
50
56
49
53
52
51
2
10
54
48
54
50
50
52
49
51
53
57
7
9
74
111
101
32
83
109
105
116
104
88

ASCII

1
1
2
8
1
5
4
3

6
0
6
2
2
4
1
3
5
9

J
o
e

S
m
i
t
h

Hex
80
21
01
08
31
31
32
38
31
35
34
33
02
0A
36
30
36
32
32
34
31
33
35
39
07
09
4A
6F
65
20
53
6D
69
74
68
58

Table III: MDMF message sample in the existing POTS
protocol [117].

338338

