Clickonomics: Determining the Effect of

Anti-Piracy Measures for One-Click Hosting

Tobias Lauinger,∗ Martin Szydlowski,† Kaan Onarlioglu,∗ Gilbert Wondracek,† Engin Kirda∗ and Christopher Kruegel‡

‡UC Santa Barbara, CA. Email: chris@cs.ucsb.edu

∗Northeastern University, Boston, MA. Email: {toby, onarliog, ek}@ccs.neu.edu

†Vienna University of Technology, Austria. Email: {msz, gilbert}@seclab.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract—Piracy is a mass phenomenon on the Internet
today. Various ﬁle sharing platforms offer free access to unau-
thorised copies of copyrighted works such as media content
and software. Copyright holders are using a range of legal
and technical methods to protect their rights, and they are
lobbying for legislation that would give them additional ways
of enforcing their copyright online. However, little is known
about how effective current forms of copyright enforcement
are and how enduring the effect of proposed new measures
can be. In this paper, we report on the results of a large-
scale measurement study of the piracy ecosystem that has
emerged around One-Click Hosters or “cyberlockers” such
as Rapidshare, Megaupload, Mediaﬁre, and Hotﬁle. Our data
shows that current anti-piracy efforts are visible, but their
overall impact appears to be rather limited. Furthermore, our
analysis of the ﬁle sharing ecosystem suggests that future anti-
piracy measures that are currently under discussion may not
be as successful as their proponents might expect. Ongoing
legal proceedings and efforts by payment processors, however,
may force hosters to increase their own anti-piracy efforts.

I. INTRODUCTION

The culture of sharing ﬁles regardless of potential copyright
infringement is older than the Internet. It began in the 80s
when underground Warez groups traded their releases on
bulletin board systems. The recent uproar caused by the
proposed U.S. Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the Anti-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) as well as the
spectacular seizure of ﬁle hosting site Megaupload’s assets on
19 January 2012, once ranked among the 100 largest web sites
worldwide, have made it clear that copyright infringement
or piracy continues to be a current and controversial topic.
The ﬁrst One-Click Hosters (OCHs) Rapidshare and
Megaupload started operating in 2004 and 2005, respectively.
They simpliﬁed the exchange of large ﬁles between users by
allowing them to upload ﬁles through a simple web interface.
The ﬁles could then be shared by sending the corresponding
download links to the intended recipients of the ﬁles. Pirates
soon discovered OCHs as a platform for their activities:
They started uploading popular movies, TV shows, music,
ebooks, games and applications to OCHs and posted the
corresponding download links on external indexing sites, so-
called direct download or streaming sites. As of today, there
are more than 300 OCHs and tens of thousands of indexing
sites. Millions of pirated ﬁles are uploaded each day.

The U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA)
grants OCHs immunity from liability for copyright
in-
fringements committed by their users if they fulﬁl certain
conditions. One of its provisions allows copyright holders
to request that infringing links be taken down. According to
the criminal indictment1 against Megaupload, in September
2009, Warner Bros. had 2,500 infringing links removed from
Megaupload on a daily basis. Furthermore, trade associations
such as the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA),
the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)
and their equivalents in other countries conduct or aid in
investigations that lead to the seizure of ﬁle sharing sites’
assets such as server hardware and domain names.

Many ﬁle sharing sites are difﬁcult to reach for law
enforcement because the servers are located in foreign
jurisdictions and the sites use addresses under foreign top-
level domain names that cannot easily be seized. Therefore,
recent lobbying efforts such as SOPA have aimed at giving
copyright enforcement actors new tools to ﬁght piracy. One
of the main proposals included in SOPA was a takedown
notice system similar to the DMCA, but targeting entire
foreign sites instead of single hosted ﬁles. While some argued
that this notice-based regime would make it possible to
prevent copyright infringement in a timely manner, others
were concerned that this system would be ripe for abuse of
all sorts and they saw it as a threat to freedom of speech.
Currently, the public debate mainly relies on partisan
arguments and opinions in favour of or against these new
anti-piracy measures. There is little empirical data that would
make it possible to assess the effectiveness of anti-piracy
measures in an objective manner. We believe that in addition
to its desirableness, a proposed law should be judged based
on its expected effectiveness—especially when the law is
criticised for having far-reaching negative side effects.

In this paper, similar to the recent line of work that has
measured and analysed spam [1], [2], [3], counterfeit pharma-
ceutical sites [4], [5], [6] and other aspects of underground
economies [7], [8], [9], we undertake an empirical effort to
quantify the supply side of One-Click Hosting-based piracy

1Superseding indictment, U.S. v. Kim Dotcom et al., 1:12-cr-00003-LO

(E.D. Va., Feb. 16, 2012) at ¶ 73 zzz.

with respect to current and proposed anti-piracy measures.
We characterise the dynamics of the ecosystem based on our
extensive data sets and observe the impact of current anti-
piracy measures. Furthermore, we analyse how vulnerable
the ecosystem might be to a range of proposed anti-piracy
measures by investigating the relationships between a range
of OCHs, indexing sites, and payment processors.

Due to the size of the ecosystem and its decentralised
structure, it is not practically feasible to characterise certain
of its aspects in a globally representative way. The approach
that we follow in this paper is to select a few large indexing
sites and to measure metrics such as the lifetime of download
links and the number of mirror copies per content object. In
a strict sense, these results hold only for the few observed
(albeit large and popular) sites. Yet, they can be seen as a
lower bound for the availability of content in the overall
ecosystem since there are many more independent sites where
additional copies of the same content can be found.

In detail, we crawled the indexing sites rlslog.net and
scnsrc.me to discover links to pirated ﬁles. Our crawler
recognised 500 types of links pointing to 300 different OCHs
and extracted around 6 million links overall. Over a duration
of 12 months in total, we periodically checked the availability
of 1.4 million of these ﬁles on a selection of 50 OCHs in
order to quantify how long infringing ﬁles could survive.
Furthermore, over a duration of 19 months, we uploaded
hourly test ﬁles to up to six OCHs and computed the OCH-
wide ﬁle upload rate. To estimate the size of the ecosystem,
we analysed the results of a popular specialised search engine.
Our data suggests that current anti-piracy efforts are visible,
but their effect is limited when compared to the overall
availability of pirated content. Furthermore, we ﬁnd some
parts of the OCH piracy ecosystem to be rather resilient
to anti-piracy approaches targeting their sources of revenue,
while other actors appear to be more exposed. Other proposed
measures can be circumvented with technology that is already
in widespread use today. These results imply that different
anti-piracy strategies may be required; from a purely technical
point of view, targeting the demand instead of the supply of
pirated content would be the most promising direction.
With this paper, we make the following contributions:
• We conduct the most in-depth investigation of the
OCH-based piracy ecosystem to date and quantify the
dynamics of OCH-based ﬁle sharing.

• We show that current anti-piracy efforts do not succeed

in making pirated content unavailable.

• We discuss how effective several proposed future anti-
piracy strategies can be expected to be, given the current
state of the OCH ﬁle sharing ecosystem.

II. BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK

With a simple web interface, One-Click Hosters (OCHs)
such as Rapidshare, Hotﬁle or Mediaﬁre allow users to upload
potentially large ﬁles that can then be reached under unique

download links. Uploaded ﬁles are private as long as the
corresponding download links remain secret; this is why
OCHs are sometimes also referred to as cyberlockers.

As with every other ﬁle distribution channel of the Internet,
OCHs are commonly used to share copyrighted works without
the rights holders’ consent. Uploaders seeking to make ﬁles
publicly available post their download links on external
indexing sites, also called direct download or streaming sites.
The function of these sites is very similar to torrent sites
such as The Pirate Bay in the BitTorrent (BT) ecosystem:
They offer a searchable catalogue of popular (and mostly
commercially exploited) content such as movies, TV shows,
music, ebooks and software. Users visit these indexing sites
or use search engines to ﬁnd the content they are looking
for and follow a link to an OCH to download the ﬁle.

One-Click Hosting-based piracy has reached a signiﬁcance
at least similar to BT. In October 2011, Alexa2 ranked
between 8 and 17 OCH indexing sites among the 100 most
visited sites in France, Germany and Spain but only 1 to 3 BT
indexing sites. (In contrast, BT was more popular in the U.S.
with 5 BT indexing sites and 2 OCH indexing sites.) Despite
these numbers, we stress that OCHs have various legitimate
use cases. Whether legitimate or illegitimate uses of OCHs
prevail is a contentious topic and beyond the scope of this
paper. In the following, we exclusively focus on abusive uses
of OCHs and leave out legitimate parts of the ecosystem.

A. Related Work

Antoniades et al. conducted the ﬁrst study of One-Click
Hosting [10], arguing that it offered a better ﬁle sharing
experience than BT (e.g., better anonymity, higher availability
and throughput). Data extracted from indexing sites revealed
that most content on the sites was published by only a small
number of users. While the authors showed the availability
of pirated content on Rapidshare, the effect of anti-piracy
measures was not a topic of their study.

The results of later work by Mahanti et al. [11] and Sanju`as-
Cuxart et al. [12] reﬂected the presence of pirated content in
the workload of OCHs, but the studies did not distinguish
legitimate and illegitimate trafﬁc or further highlight the
effects of copyright enforcement. In [13], Mahanti et al.
investigated how users discovered and shared content. They
also analysed Web analytics data by Compete.com to
characterise the popularity evolution of OCHs and indexing
sites, reporting similar downloader-driven trends as we found
in our uploader-driven data in Section IV-B.

Nikiforakis et al. [14] found that the download links used
by many OCHs were vulnerable to guessing attacks. They
showed that attackers were already exploiting this weakness
to compromise the privacy of uploaders.

In a previous study [15], we analysed the demand for
pirated content posted on three indexing sites and estimated

2http://www.alexa.com/topsites

takedown efforts by copyright owners), many uploaders hide
their download links behind a layer of redirection, such as
general-purpose URL shorteners or specialised link protection
services such as linksafe.me. In addition to hiding the
original download link from the indexing site, uploaders can
optionally request that downloaders solve a Captcha before
they are redirected to the OCH. Furthermore, many sites and
services automatically check if download links are still valid
and mark, remove or replace them if they are not. Undeadlink
was one such service that automatically reuploaded a ﬁle
when the original copy was deleted from the OCH. Figure 1
illustrates the optional use of various kinds of services in a
redirection chain between a link posted on an indexing site
and the actual link target hosted on an OCH.

C. Funding in the OCH Ecosystem

Most OCHs sell premium services to users who wish
to enjoy higher download throughput and less advertising.
According to the criminal indictment,3 Megaupload received
at least 150 million dollars in subscription fees and 25 million
dollars for advertising between September 2005 and 5 January
2012. In order to attract popular content (and new paying
members) to their service, most OCHs used to operate
(and several continue to operate) afﬁliate programmes for
uploaders and indexing sites. These afﬁliate programmes
ﬁnancially reward uploaders and indexing sites based on
the number of downloads and member subscriptions that
they generate. Megaupload, for instance, used to reward one
million downloads with $ 1,500 and Wupload used to pay
up to $ 40 per one thousand downloads.

These afﬁliate programmes are controversial for allegedly
encouraging users to upload infringing content and thereby
funding piracy. Megaupload’s former afﬁliate programme
and their alleged knowledge that afﬁliates uploaded pirated
content were a central element of the criminal indictment4
that lead to the seizure of Megaupload’s assets, the detention
of its operators, and the shutdown of the site on 19 January
2012. In the aftermath, most OCHs modiﬁed or terminated
their afﬁliate programmes. Several OCHs (including Filesonic,
Wupload and X7) quit the ﬁle sharing business altogether.
In addition to the OCHs’ afﬁliate programmes, uploaders,
indexing sites and service providers such as link protectors
can generate revenue through advertisements. Some indexing
sites collect donations, and a few require members to suscribe
in order to access “premium” content. In contrast, especially
smaller sites do not have any apparent source of income
and may be run as hobby projects. Despite the end of most
OCH afﬁliate programmes and additional evidence that it has
become harder to earn money in the ecosystem (as discussed

3Superseding indictment, U.S. v. Kim Dotcom et al., 1:12-cr-00003-LO

(E.D. Va., Feb. 16, 2012) at ¶ 4.
4Superseding indictment, U.S. v. Kim Dotcom et al., 1:12-cr-00003-LO
(E.D. Va., Feb. 16, 2012) at ¶ 58; ¶ 73 g−j, v, y, bb, jj, pp, qq, uu, ppp,
qqq, www, xxx; and ¶ 102.

Figure 1. Overview of the OCH ecosystem: An uploader uploads a ﬁle to
one or more OCHs, optionally wraps the download links using redirection
services such as link shorteners, and posts the links on indexing sites.

the corresponding income that content uploaders could derive
from OCHs’ afﬁliate programmes. In these three particular
communities, we found that only very few uploaders were
potentially earning signiﬁcant amounts of money. Further-
more, these high-income uploaders were not essential for the
supply of pirated content because other uploaders (with lower
income) provided alternative copies of most content. Zubin
Jelveh and Keith Ross [16] used payment screenshots posted
in a webmaster forum to deduce the range of actual uploader
income through Filesonic’s afﬁliate programme. Based on 151
earnings screenshots, they reported a daily uploader income
ranging from $ 0 to $ 226.27 with an average of $ 33.69.

B. The OCH Ecosystem

Beyond the indexing sites described in prior work, a whole
ecosystem of specialised services has emerged around OCHs.
Various search engines specialise in OCH download links
extracted from indexing sites; Filestube is the most popular
representative of them. So-called multi-upload services spread
ﬁles over several different OCHs on the users’ behalf and
multi-download services provide their paying subscribers
with premium download access to several OCHs at once.
Because large ﬁles are sometimes split into smaller parts
(these can be hundreds of parts for very large ﬁles), some
sites offer so-called container ﬁles or use external container
services that provide all the download links for the individual
parts grouped together under one single link. These container
ﬁles can be opened with specialised download managers
such as JDownloader. Specialised advertising services such
as adf.ly or linkbucks.com work similar to URL
shorteners, but display interstitial or pop-up advertisements
and allow uploaders to monetise their links.

One-Click Hosters typically disable infringing download
links when they receive DMCA complaints from the re-
spective copyright holders. In order to prevent automated
link extraction from indexing sites (that might correspond to

AdvertisingLink ProtectionURL ShorteningSite 1Site 3Site 2OCH 1OCH 2uploads ﬁlesposts linksUploaderin Section V-A), many indexing sites and other services
continue to exist, which implies that they are still proﬁtable
in either monetary or altruistic terms.
D. Current Anti-Piracy Measures

Anti-piracy measures for OCHs are dominated by the
difﬁculty for copyright holders to identify uploaders or
downloaders of pirated content. P2P networks, for instance,
reveal the IP addresses of peers to other participants, while
communication in OCH-based ﬁle sharing is direct between
the uploader or downloader and the indexing site or OCH.
Furthermore, deterrence in the case of OCH may be less
effective because the ﬁnes for downloading infringing content
are lower than for uploading, which is usually automatic for
P2P downloaders but not for OCH downloaders.

Section 512(c) of the U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright
Act (DMCA) provides copyright holders with a takedown
mechanism to disable access to infringing ﬁles. The DMCA
“safe harbour” provision grants compliant hosting providers
such as OCHs (but also YouTube, for instance) immunity
against copyright infringements committed by their users.
Most OCHs, even if located outside of the U.S., claim to
honour takedown requests. Similar DMCA rules apply to
other online service providers such as search engines.

Copyright owners use this mechanism to have infringing
ﬁles removed from OCHs. They either manually search
the Internet for infringing ﬁles, or they utilise the services
of specialised agencies that automatically crawl the web
and extract download links from indexing sites and search
engines. Corresponding takedown notices are then sent to
OCHs and search engines, respectively. Chilling Effects5
maintains a database of the takedown notices sent to services
such as Google and Twitter, and Google themselves provide
statistics about copyright-related takedown requests in their
Transparency Report.6 Urban and Quilter [17] performed
an analysis of 876 such notices, including all 734 notices
submitted to Google from March 2002 until August 2005,
and found that at least one third of the notices were ﬂawed.
Several lawsuits against OCHs with allegations of copy-
right infringement are currently pending. As of the time of
writing, none of them has been decided by a court of ﬁnal
appeal. Indexing sites have been targeted by arresting the
operators and seizing the server hardware, such as in the case
against Ninjavideo7 in the U.S. If an indexing site was located
outside of the U.S., Immigration and Customs Enforcement
have in the past seized domain names that were under U.S.
jurisdiction (.com and .org in the case of the Spanish site
Rojadirecta8). Courts in various European countries have

5http://www.chillingeffects.org/dmca512/notice.cgi
6http://www.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/copyright/
7enigmax,

“NinjaVideo Founder Sentenced To 22 Months

in
Prison,” http://torrentfreak.com/ninjavideo-founder-sentenced-to-22-months-
in-prison-120106/, 6 Jan. 2012.

8Veriﬁed complaint, U.S. v. Rojadirecta.org et al., 1:11-cv-04139-PAC

(S.D.N.Y., June 17, 2011).

ordered ISPs to block access to The Pirate Bay based on
either their domain name or IP addresses; similar measures
are conceivable for OCH-based sites.

III. MEASUREMENT METHODOLOGY

Our analysis in this paper is based on a range of data
sets extracted from different actors of the OCH ﬁle sharing
ecosystem: The INDEXING data set contains download links
found on several indexing sites, along with metadata about
when and by whom the links were published. The LIFETIME
data set contains time-based availability data for a subset
of these links. In IDLOGGER, we measure the global ﬁle
upload rate of several OCHs, and in FILESTUBE, we crawl a
specialised search engine for ﬁle-sharing related links in order
to estimate a lower bound of the OCH ﬁle sharing ecosystem’s
size. Table I summarises the time of our measurements and
the key characteristics of these data sets.

A. Analysis of Indexing Site Data Sources

In order to obtain structured information about ﬁles being
shared, we crawled several indexing sites to extract public
download links together with metadata about their contents
and the users who posted the links. There is a great variety
of different types of indexing sites, ranging from smaller
blogs with occasional download links to specialised sites
using sophisticated web applications with social networking
features. We extracted links from 14 different indexing sites
in total, but for the sake of a clearer presentation, in this
paper we use only data gathered from rlslog.net and
scnsrc.me, two so-called release blogs. These sites are
specialised in the timely dissemination of fresh releases
originating from the P2P or Warez Scene, that is, content
with an often high commercial value, such as movies, TV
shows, music, ebooks and software shortly after their ofﬁcial
release date in stores, and sometimes even before. (For an
introduction to the Warez Scene, refer to [18], [19], [20].)
The sites are organised like blogs: For each content object,
staff members post a main entry with a review of the content
and a few download links. Most download links, however,
are added by independent, unregistered uploaders who post
them in (anonymous) comments to the blog entries made by
the site staff. There are no rules that would restrict the choice
of the OCH, for instance. This characteristic allows us to
better observe how changes in the OCH ecosystem affect
the behaviour of uploaders independent of policy constraints.
The amount and speed of posts as well as the use of particular
OCHs and advertising services suggest a higher degree of
proﬁt-oriented uploader behaviour on these sites than what
we observed on a different set of sites in prior work [15].
According to our observations, the posts published on
rlslog.net and scnsrc.me contain almost no legiti-
mate content. We manually analysed two random samples of
1,000 content objects posted on each of the two sites. Only

THE DATA SETS USED IN THIS PAPER. FOR (B) AND (C), THE ORIGINAL MEASUREMENT TOOK PLACE UNTIL NOVEMBER 2011 (I) WITH A FOLLOW-UP

MEASUREMENT AFTER THE MEGAUPLOAD SHUTDOWN IN 2012 (II).

Table I

Site
Alexa Rank
First Post
Last Post
# Content
# Links

(a) INDEXING

rlslog.net

scnsrc.me

1,557
01/2006
04/2012
70,423

4,997,040

14,099
03/2008
04/2012
25,880

2,200,814

(b) LIFETIME

rlslog.net

12/2010 − 07/2011
03/2012 − 04/2012
01/2011 − 11/2011
03/2012 − 05/2012

13,133

1,376,334
1,294,739

scnsrc.me

04/2011 − 07/2011
03/2012 − 04/2012
01/2011 − 11/2011
03/2012 − 05/2012

2,974
350,136
322,611

Site
Links Extracted I
Links Extracted II
Links Checked I
Links Checked II
# Content Obj.
# Links Found
# Links Checked

(c) IDLOGGER

OCH
Time Span I
Time Span II
# Test Uploads

Rapidshare

06/2010−05/2011

−

Hotﬁle

12/2010−11/2011
02/2012−05/2012

16,150

20,741

Duckload
05−06/2011

−
1,041

Filesonic
06−10/2011
02−03/2012

Wupload
06−11/2011
02−04/2012

Easy-share
07−10/2011
02−02/2012

8,328

10,022

6,904

two freeware tools and some news reports (without down-
load links) appeared to be legitimate. All remaining posts
corresponded to material that was commercially exploited,
and therefore most likely not meant to be freely available.
The proportion of polluted content, that is, ﬁles that were
corrupted or did not contain the advertised content, appeared
to be signiﬁcantly lower on rlslog.net and scnsrc.me
than what had been observed in the past on P2P networks [21],
[22]. We downloaded and manually inspected the links posted
for ten content objects representing one item of each category
present on the indexing sites, that is, TV shows, movies,
ebooks, music, games, and software. Our sample included
an episode of the TV shows Gossip Girl and Fringe, an
early copy of the James Bond movie Skyfall (which had just
been released to movie theatres), a prerelease copy of the
latest album by Robbie Williams, Take the Crown, as well
as a DVD rip of The Expendables 2 and several game and
software titles. Overall, we downloaded 194 ﬁles. Four of
them were linked in the main blog post written by site staff;
all others were extracted from mostly anonymous comments.
At least 93 % of the downloaded ﬁles appeared authentic.
The remaining ﬁles were either authentic content posted in
the wrong category (e.g., a wrong episode or wrong TV
show), or they were password-protected and we could not
open and verify them as authentic because we did not have
access to the password. Consequently, we can assume that the
vast majority of download links posted on rlslog.net
and scnsrc.me were leading to “authentic,” copyright-
infringing content. One might speculate that the difference
to P2P systems is due to the possibility of sending DMCA
takedown notices to OCHs. It may be more effective for
copyright owners to have infringing ﬁles removed instead of
adding fake ﬁles. Legal issues might be another reason.

While we veriﬁed the authenticity of the ﬁles by inspecting
them in a virtual Linux machine, we did not carry out
any detailed analysis regarding potential maliciousness.
Kammerstetter et al. [23] found that the majority of cracks
and key generators downloaded from the Internet, including
OCHs, were malicious and attempted to infect the victim’s
machine with some kind of malware. However, the authors
did not further analyse the provenance of their download
links—that is, whether they had initially been posted on scam
sites or on more reputable indexing sites.

In our sample, once all archives had been extracted, we
detected only few different ﬁle versions for the same content,
which corresponded to different scene releases. In the case of
executable ﬁles, all of them had identical hash values, which
made them rather unlikely to be malicious. We cannot fully
exclude the presence of malware on the two indexing sites,
and we observed a low number of user complaints to that end.
Yet, software accounted for only 8.94 % of the download
links on scnsrc.me and 15.11 % on rlslog.net, which
limits the maximum impact of malware on our overall results.

B. Full Crawls of Indexing Sites

For the INDEXING data set, we performed a full crawl of
rlslog.net and scnsrc.me during which we extracted
the entire archive of links posted on the two sites. The full
crawls permit us to analyse how the behaviour of link posters
evolved over time. Our crawler contained regular expressions
to recognise 500 different types of links, corresponding to
300 different OCHs and several further “service providers”
such as link protection and advertising services. We also
automatically extracted download links hidden behind URL
shorteners and advertising or link protection services if this
was possible without solving a Captcha, for instance.

C. Lifetime of Links on OCHs

D. Upload Rate of Files to OCHs

In order to establish the LIFETIME data set of infringing
ﬁles on OCHs, we carried out additional real-time crawls
of rlslog.net and scnsrc.me. Our goal was to detect
new content and links as soon as they were published on the
indexing sites. For the real-time crawls, we retrieved each
site’s RSS feed once an hour to discover new blog posts. We
then extracted the metadata and links contained in the page
similar to the full crawls. Additionally, we continued to fetch
each blog post repeatedly to detect new links in comments
that were added after publication of the original post.

To check the validity of the links discovered in the real-
time crawls, we periodically requested availability informa-
tion from 50 OCHs. Our link checker supported the 20 most
frequently used OCHs on the indexing sites and a selection
of less popular OCHs. To check the status of a link, we used
the OCHs’ link checking APIs where available. In many
cases, such an API permitted to check 100 links at a time
and returned for each link the ﬁle name, the ﬁle size, and
whether the ﬁle was still available or deleted. In the case that
the OCH did not offer an API, we resorted to requesting the
link’s download page and inferred the status of the ﬁle from
the server’s HTML response. We internally stored the status
of a ﬁle as online, ofﬂine, or unknown,9 and we kept track of
the last time that we had seen a ﬁle online. We checked each
online or unknown ﬁle’s status at least once every 48 hours
(and more frequently during the ﬁrst weeks of its discovery);
ofﬂine ﬁles were checked weekly. All in all, more than 1.4
million links published on rlslog.net and scnsrc.me
were periodically checked in this way.

Files on OCHs can be deleted for several reasons, such as
copyright infringement, expiry after a ﬁxed amount of time
or a ﬁxed amount of downloads, system failures, or when
users manually delete ﬁles or close their accounts. Note that
most OCHs do not publicly disclose why a speciﬁc ﬁle has
been removed. As we have not seen any notable number of
links to legitimate content on the indexing sites, we assume
that all ﬁles in the data set infringe copyright and could be
rightfully removed by the respective copyright owners.

We deﬁne the lifetime of a link (or ﬁle) as the time span
between the time when the link was published, that is, the
ﬁrst time that a copyright holder could become aware of the
existence of the ﬁle, and the last time that we saw the ﬁle
online. Our lifetime estimates are conservative in that they
underestimate the ﬁle lifetime in case of errors or delays.

Depending on the indexing site, the experiment lasted for
up to 10 months (see Table I(b)). We stopped adding new
links 45 days before we halted our link checker. That is, the
lifetime distribution of all links is accurate for a duration of
up to 45 days; data censoring affects only longer time spans.

9A ﬁle’s status became unknown in the case of network errors, or if the
server’s response could not be understood, such as when the API or HTML
template of download pages had changed.

The download links of several OCHs contained ﬁle
identiﬁers that were sequential [14]. We leveraged this fact
to estimate the total number of ﬁles uploaded each day to
Rapidshare, Hotﬁle, Duckload, Filesonic, Wupload, and Easy-
share. We gathered the IDLOGGER data set by uploading a
test ﬁle to each OCH every 30 minutes and by extracting the
ﬁle identiﬁer reported in the corresponding download link.
The number of third-party uploads between two test uploads
is the numerical difference between the two ﬁle identiﬁers.
We found that all OCHs except for Filesonic effectively
assigned every possible identiﬁer; Filesonic assigned roughly
11 % of the identiﬁers at the time of the experiment (only
identiﬁers ending with 1 or 4 but not always both of them).
We continued the experiment until the OCHs stopped using
sequential identiﬁers or quit the ﬁle sharing business.

E. Domains and Addresses of Indexing Sites

In order to estimate a lower bound for the number of
OCH indexing sites, we queried filestube.com, a search
engine specialised in OCH download links, for 43 piracy-
related search terms. From the search results, we extracted the
domain names of the indexing sites where the download links
had been found. Because Filestube provided only the ﬁrst
100 result pages with 10 hits each, we increased the number
of results by additionally following up to 50 suggested
related search terms. These were typically reﬁnements of
the original search term, such as “season 2,” “dvdrip” or
“french.” The FILESTUBE data set contains all the domain
names found in the search results. Additionally, we looked
up the domain names on the same day in April 2012 from
a computer located in California and recorded the primary
and alias domain names as well as the IP addresses returned
in response to the lookups. The latter data provides us with
an approximation of the jurisdictional diversity of the OCH
indexing site ecosystem.

F. Limitations

The design choices that we have made in our study imply
certain limitations as to the conclusions that we can draw
from our data. Firstly, our methodology of detecting links
based on regular expressions means that we might not detect
links of OCHs that are used very infrequently. Certain types
of protected links that we did not extract, such as those
protected by a Captcha, might have a longer lifetime that
what we have measured. However, our resulting ﬁndings are
conservative in that they can only underestimate the size of
the OCH ecosystem and the availability of pirated content.
Secondly, while the chosen release blogs are among the
largest of this category of indexing sites, they are not repre-
sentative for the whole OCH-based piracy ecosystem. Yet,
they mirror many general trends that we have also informally
observed on other types of indexing sites, including the
lifetime of links, the diversity of OCHs, and the number of

available mirror copies. Furthermore, since we argue in this
paper that anti-piracy measures for OCH are failing, using
just one popular and generally accessible site to measure
a lower bound on link lifetime and ecosystem diversity is
sufﬁcient to show that pirated content remains available.

Note that the indexing sites crawled for this paper reference
only a tiny fraction of the ﬁles uploaded to OCHs. Sources
of uploads not covered by our work include ﬁles posted on
indexing sites that we did not crawl and ﬁles uploaded for
private use with download links that were never published.
Therefore, our study does not permit to draw any conclusions
about the fraction of piracy-related content stored on OCHs.

G. Ethical Considerations

All the data sets were gathered from public data sources
only. Even though the INDEXING and LIFETIME data sets
occasionally contain the user names of uploaders, this infor-
mation is publicly reported by indexing sites and OCHs and
freely chosen by the uploaders of the ﬁles. We have no means
to link user names to real-world identities or IP addresses.
Therefore, we do not consider the data sets to jeopardise
any person’s privacy. Furthermore, we implemented best
practices such as rate limitation and exponentially increasing
retry intervals in order not to overload the queried sites.

IV. IMPACT OF ANTI-PIRACY MEASURES

Based on our measurement data, we assess the real-
world effect of a range of measures that aim to reduce the
availability of pirated content in the OCH ecosystem: DMCA
takedown notices in Section IV-A, anti-piracy measures
implemented by OCHs in Section IV-B, and hardware seizure
to take down OCHs or indexing sites in Section IV-C.

A. DMCA Takedown Notices

Copyright owners can ask OCHs to take down infringing
ﬁles. OCHs typically provide an email address that accepts
DMCA takedown notices. Some OCHs even give access to
an internal link removal tool that allows copyright holders
to directly remove infringing links. In order to assess how
effective this mechanism is for copyright enforcement, we
observe the lifetime of infringing links in the LIFETIME data.
Figure 2 shows the lifetime CDF of links posted on
rlslog.net in June 2011 and from 8 to 19 March 2012
for a selection of OCHs. We observe two general trends.
Firstly, for most OCHs, more than half of the links survive
for at least 30 days, even though they are all infringing.
Secondly, the shape of the curves is rather steep in the ﬁrst
three to ﬁve days and ﬂattens out afterwards. For some OCHs,
link deletions increase again after several weeks.

We do not have any ground truth data that would allow us
to explain with certainty the shape of the link lifetime curves.
However, we make two observations: Users who deliberately
publish download links to pirated content appear to have few
reasons to delete their ﬁles themselves just a few hours or

days after the upload—storage capacity is either unlimited
or so large that it can hardly be exhausted within a few days.
On the contrary, uploaders interested in proﬁt have incentives
to keep the ﬁles available for longer time periods in order
to increase their income. Consequently, link deletions within
the ﬁrst few days are most likely due to copyright holders’
takedown efforts with the goal of removing links as quickly
as possible. Under this interpretation, infringing ﬁles on some
OCHs such as Megaupload or Rapidshare appear to be taken
down much faster than on others such as Bitshare.

Our second observation is that many OCHs enforce expiry
times for ﬁles that were uploaded by non-premium users.
Wupload, for instance, deleted ﬁles uploaded by non-premium
users 30 days after the upload. (Note that the statements
made on several OCHs’ web sites are inconsistent with their
actual expiry policies observed in our data and in ad hoc
experiments.) A clear increase in the link lifetime CDF curve
after a period of stability, such as around 30 days for Wupload
and Uploaded in Figure 2(a), makes it plausible that these
links were most likely automatically deleted due to expiry.
If we admit this explanation, it is striking to observe that on
some OCHs, more pirated ﬁles appear to be deleted due to
expiry rather than because of takedown requests.

When comparing the situation before and after the shut-
down of Megaupload in Figures 2(a) and 2(b), respectively,
the curves for Rapidshare and Netload exhibit the same
general trend. Uploaded, on the other hand, nearly doubled its
deletion rate within the ﬁrst ﬁve days. Furthermore, the linear
increase in its curve between day 7 and 18 in Figure 2(b)
corresponds to a single mass deletion event: On 26 and 27
March 2012, Uploaded deleted more than 2,800 links from
our data sets. The daily average for the other days of the
month was only around 400. One might speculate whether
the shutdown of Megaupload may have encouraged other
OCHs to increase their own anti-piracy diligence.

Determining the exact reasons for link removal may
be an interesting topic for future work. However, from a
downloader’s perspective, the reason why a link becomes
unavailable has little importance; what really matters is that
most of them remain valid for rather long periods of time.
The next natural question is how the availability of
individual links translates to the availability of content. To
this end, Figure 3 ranks the content objects added in March
of the years 2006 to 2012 on rlslog.net by the number
of alternative download links. Recall that the indexing site
groups download links by content object. Uploaders may
add arbitrary amounts of (alternative) download links for
each content object. Consequently, the index page for each
content object typically contains links to copies uploaded
to different OCHs, and frequently also several versions of
the same content on the same OCH. At the inception of
rlslog.net in 2006, the site was mainly posting links
to other BitTorrent sites, resulting in few OCH download
links. However, from 2009 to 2011, the median number of

(a) Links posted in June 2011.

(b) Links posted from 8 to 19 March 2012.

Figure 2. Link lifetime CDFs on rlslog.net. For each OCH, between 742 and 42,092 links were checked for at least 45 days after they had been
posted. Link deletions during the ﬁrst ﬁve days appear to be most likely due to copyright violations. Later deletions, such as after 30 days, can additionally
be due to link expiry on the OCH.

nuisance to downloaders who encounter occasional broken
links. Yet, our data suggests that they remain limited as to
the total extent of copyright infringements. In particular, the
availability results presented in this section refer to only one
speciﬁc indexing site; content availability is strictly larger
when considering the whole OCH ecosystem. In the future,
the content industry might be able to increase their takedown
efforts, but indexing sites could equally aim to better “protect”
their links. It is not clear how an increased use of Captchas,
for instance, would affect the efﬁcacy of takedown efforts.

B. Effects on Cooperative OCHs

Lawsuits and voluntary action to combat piracy on their
services have lead OCHs to implement a range of anti-piracy
measures, including ﬁle name or hash blacklists, termination
of upload incentive programmes, and removal of repeat
infringer accounts. Using the global upload rate data provided
by IDLOGGER and OCH popularity on indexing sites, we
look into how uploaders have reacted to the implementation
of such measures. The goal is to assess whether these local
measures were globally effective in reducing piracy.

Figure 4 shows the total number of daily uploads to
a range of OCHs according to the IDLOGGER data set.
Rapidshare’s uploader popularity sharply decreased in the
end of June 2010; this coincided with the termination of their
rewards programme.10 Hotﬁle experienced a similar decrease
in upload activity in the middle of February 2011 when they

10Ernesto, “RapidShare Kills Reward Program Over Piracy Con-
cerns,” http://torrentfreak.com/rapidshare-kills-reward-program-over-piracy-
concerns-100620/, 20 Jun. 2010.

Figure 3. Alternative links per content object on rlslog.net. In March
2012, each content object had a median of 43 mirrors. Large numbers of
copies would need to be taken down in order to impact content availability.

alternative downloads per content object roughly doubled
each year, reaching 48 in 2011, and decreasing slightly to 43
in 2012. We ascribe the latter observation to the aftermath of
the Megaupload shutdown, which saw several other OCHs
discontinue their afﬁliate programmes or quit the ﬁle sharing
business altogether. However, the current situation illustrates
that it still takes a lot of effort to effectively take down
all copies of pirated content. The high number of copies
makes it reasonable to expect the availability of content to be
signiﬁcantly better than the availability of individual links.
In conclusion, the effects of current DMCA takedown
efforts as an anti-piracy tool are visible and may cause a

051015202530354045lifetime (in days)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFMegauploadNetloadRapidshareUploadedWupload051015202530354045lifetime (in days)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFBitshareNetloadRapidshareUploadedVip-file1e+001e+011e+021e+031e+04rank1e+001e+011e+021e+03#alternative downloads per content objectMar 06Mar 07Mar 08Mar 09Mar 10Mar 11Mar 12Figure 4. The global number of ﬁles uploaded daily to several OCHs. The
dotted parts correspond to ofﬂine periods of the IDlogger.

Figure 5.
The number of links posted monthly on scnsrc.me for a
selection of OCHs. Uploaders quickly switched to other OCHs in the event
of unfavourable policy changes.

started to delete the accounts of repeat copyright infringers.11
On the other hand, other OCHs were able to exponentially
increase the number of uploaded ﬁles. Wupload, for instance,
started operating around May 2011 and initially offered a
competitive afﬁliate programme. However, their upload trafﬁc
nosedived when they announced in November 2011 that they
were going to put their afﬁliate programme to an end.12

Even though the upload rates reported by IDLOGGER
include legitimate ﬁles, changes in the upload rates closely
coincide with policy changes that mainly affected infringing
users of OCHs. This suggests that a non-negligible fraction
of some OCHs’ upload trafﬁc may have been related to
piracy activities, and that the policy changes have led to a
local reduction of infringing uploads.

To address this issue from a more global point of view,
we look at the number of links per OCH posted monthly
on the sites in the INDEXING data set. Figure 5 plots the
evolution of OCH popularity for a selection of OCHs on
scnsrc.me. It makes clear that the fading popularity of one
OCH was compensated by the rising popularity of another
OCH. Consequently, anti-piracy policies of single OCHs
appear to have displaced piracy to other OCHs rather than
reducing it on a global scale. As we will show in the next
section, the OCH ecosystem is large and diverse, and there
are new OCHs entering the market who can potentially take
over infringing trafﬁc. After the shutdown of Megaupload
and the subsequent voluntary shutdowns of other OCHs, even
initially abandoned OCHs such as Rapidshare gained new

11enigmax, “Hotﬁle Goes To War Against Copyright

Infringers,”

http://torrentfreak.com/hotﬁle-goes-to-war-against-copyright-infringers-
110219/, 19 Feb. 2011.

12enigmax, “FileServe and Wupload Exit The File-Sharing Busi-
ness,” http://torrentfreak.com/ﬁleserve-and-wupload-exit-the-ﬁle-sharing-
business-120403/, 3 Apr. 2012.

popularity with pirates and had to take drastic measures13 to
curb the surging piracy. Interestingly, we observed that the
new use of Rapidshare and other “traditional” OCHs was
often associated with the use of advertising services such
as adf.ly to compensate proﬁt-oriented uploaders for the
absence of an OCH afﬁliate programme.

In conclusion, convincing or coercing OCHs to implement
more advanced anti-piracy measures can drive away pirates.
However, instead of ceasing to pirate, uploaders appear to
move to less cooperative OCHs. Lower levels of piracy subsist
even on the more diligent OCHs.

C. Hardware Seizure

When the degree of cooperation of OCH ﬁle sharing actors
is deemed insufﬁcient, it may be an option to locate and
seize the server hardware to shut down the site. The impact
of such an event on the ecosystem is different according to
whether it is an OCH or an indexing site.

1) One-Click Hosters: In order to assess the impact of an
OCH shutdown on an indexing site, we analyse the monthly
and cumulative use of OCHs on rlslog.net as shown
in Figure 6. As of April 2012, the site contained links to
almost 300 different OCHs, and since June 2009, the site
has consistently been using at least 50 different OCHs each
month. These numbers illustrate that uploaders have a large
choice of OCHs available, and that the OCH ecosystem has
grown so diverse that there is no single indispensable actor.
After the shutdown of Megaupload, the slope of the
cumulative curve increased slightly, which means that even
more new OCHs have entered the ecosystem, despite the
now apparent risks. Many of these new OCHs are based on

13enigmax, “RapidShare Slows Download Speeds To Drive Away
Pirates,” http://torrentfreak.com/rapidshare-slows-download-speeds-to-drive-
away-pirates-120224/, 24 Feb. 2012.

Aug 2010Feb 2011Aug 2011Feb 2012date1e+031e+041e+051e+061e+071e+081e+09files uploaded per dayMegaupload shutdownRapidshareHotfileDuckloadFilesonicWuploadEasy-shareFeb 2009Feb 2010Feb 2011Feb 2012date01000020000300004000050000links posted per month on scnsrc.meMegaupload shutdownRapidshareHotfileWuploadUploadedRapidgatorFigure 7 shows that the large OCH diversity also translates
to single content objects: In March 2011, more than 80 % of
all content objects on rlslog.net had links to at least 8
different OCHs; in March 2012, this value increased to over
90 % and the median number of OCHs per content object
was 16. The large number of OCHs per content object means
that most objects will remain available on other OCHs if any
single OCH is shut down. However, other types of indexing
sites and especially smaller sites may rely on fewer OCHs
and may be more vulnerable to OCH takedowns.

Taking down an OCH is a long and costly legal process,
while setting up a new OCH is not. This imbalance results
in a large and diverse OCH ecosystem that is difﬁcult to
physically take down in its entirety. Uploaders and indexing
sites can leverage this advantage to become more resilient
to OCH takedown efforts.

2) Indexing Sites: In contrast to OCHs, indexing sites
have moderate storage and trafﬁc requirements, which means
that indexing sites can be taken “offshore” more easily. It is
not unusual at least for larger indexing sites to have servers
located in different countries, with the true locations often
being hidden behind a load balancing or anti-DDoS service.
Investigations against such sites can be time-consuming. The
most popular German-language streaming site kino.to, for
instance, was closed down during a police raid in several
European countries on 8 June 2011. According to the rights
holder organisation GVU, their preliminary investigation
against the site had lasted “for years.”15 However, few weeks
later a clone of the site resurfaced at kinox.to. It is still
online as of December 2012, albeit not as popular.

The FILESTUBE data set allows us to estimate a lower
bound on the number of indexing sites on the Internet. As
shown in Table II, links pointing to OCHs and associated with
piracy-related search terms were found on 9,825 different
domains. These domains range from otherwise legitimate
services such as Facebook or Blogger to pure “stand-alone”
indexing sites. Out of the domains, 814 could not be resolved
any more, indicating that the corresponding sites have ceased
to exist or moved to a different location. The true number of
indexing sites is likely to be much higher because we used
only 43 search terms and because Filestube indexes only
unprotected links of a limited number of OCHs. Yet, these
numbers already illustrate that physically taking down all
indexing sites would be a very resource-consuming option.
Table III gives an overview of the 10 most frequent top
level domains of the resolved primary and alias domain
names as well as the countries of the associated IP addresses
looked up in the Maxmind GeoLite database. Some of the
disproportionately popular top-level domain names such as
cc (Cocos Islands) and ws (Samoa) have a reputation for
allowing anonymous registration and for not being subject to

Figure 6.
The number of different OCHs used over time, per month
and cumulative, and the number of link protection services used on
rlslog.net. The slope of the cumulative curves increased in February
2012 after the shutdown of Megaupload and the afﬁliate programmes of
several other large OCHs.

Figure 7. The number of different OCHs used in the download links of
content objects on rlslog.net.

XFileSharing Pro, a commercial script package that allows
webmasters to operate their own OCH for a one-off software
licence starting at $ 200 for the basic script and a payment
gateway14 and requiring only moderate programming skills.
Overall, we are aware of more than 125 current and former
OCHs using this script; the technical barrier of entry to the
OCH market appears to be low. Figure 6 also illustrates that
uploaders are increasingly using protection services, which
include advertising services that help to compensate for the
many afﬁliate programmes that were discontinued in the
aftermath of the Megaupload shutdown.

14Sibsoft XFileSharing Pro, available at http://sibsoft.net/xﬁlesharing.html,

accessed 6 May 2012.

15GVU, “Internationale Durchsuchungsaktion gegen das System kino.to,”

http://www.gvu.de/media/pdf/768.pdf, press release pub. on 8 Jun. 2011.

Apr 06Apr 07Apr 08Apr 09Apr 10Apr 11Apr 12date050100150200250300OCHs in use on rlslog.netMegaupload shutdownOCHs (cumulative)OCHs (monthly)protection services (cumulative)protection services (monthly)1e+001e+01#OCHs per content object0.00.20.40.60.81.0CCDFMar 06Mar 07Mar 08Mar 09Mar 10Mar 11Mar 12DISTINCT DOMAIN NAMES AND IP ADDRESSES FOUND IN THE FIRST 1,000 RESULTS FOR PIRACY-RELATED SEARCH TERMS ON F I L E S T U B E.C O M

(APRIL 2012). INCLUDES 50 SUGGESTED RELATED TERMS PER SEARCH TERM.

Table II

Search Term
californication
for dummies
lady gaga
need for speed
photoshop
other (27 terms)
total (distinct)
crack
dvdrip
other (9 terms)
total (distinct)
total (distinct)

Domain Names
257
506
721
570
1,531
4,828
7,045
916
1,019
3,217
4,225
9,825

Unresolved
15
31
34
36
147
325
506
100
101
314
420
814

Primary
210
367
446
392
974
3,159
4,352
659
747
2,128
2,784
5,971

Alias
43
115
264
157
445
1,434
2,316
181
189
827
1,085
3,198

IP Addresses
251
388
485
444
951
2,766
3,564
629
702
1,748
2,224
4,478

c
ﬁ

i
c
e
p
s

c
i
r
e
n
e
g

TOP 10 TOP-LEVEL DOMAIN NAMES AND IP ADDRESS COUNTRIES
FOUND ON F I L E S T U B E.C O M (RESOLVED DOMAINS FROM TAB. II).

Table III

ecosystem. The following key ﬁndings summarise the limita-
tions of current anti-piracy measures:

Domain Names

% Country

TLD
com
net
org
ru
info
pl
cc
vn
ws
in

#
6,197
1,013
471
391
161
88
61
59
52
49

67.59
11.05
5.14
4.26
1.76
0.96
0.67
0.64
0.57
0.53

IP Addresses
#
1,782
439
329
307
223
160
145
120
89
69

U.S.
Germany
Netherlands
Russia
France
Ukraine
Vietnam
Turkey
U.K.
Canada

%
39.79
9.80
7.35
6.86
4.98
3.57
3.24
2.68
1.99
1.54

domain name seizures, but most of the domain names on the
list could still be seized by U.S. authorities. The countries
of the IP addresses associated with the domain names are
more widely spread, illustrating the potential jurisdictional
complications in investigations against indexing sites. If an
IP address corresponds to a load balancing service, the true
server location of the indexing site can be different again.
Overall, the large size and diversity of the OCH-based ﬁle
sharing ecosystem mean that there is no dependency on any
single actor. Physical takedown efforts cannot realistically
scale to the extent and speed that would be required to
eradicate the entire ecosystem. Complicated and lengthy
cross-border investigations against indexing sites and the
relative ease with which a new site can be opened rather
suggest that the physical takedown of an indexing site is
viable only for high-proﬁle cases.

D. Summary

In this section, we analysed our long-term measurement
data to characterise the dynamics of the OCH ﬁle sharing

• On most OCHs, more than 50 % of the ﬁles remain
online for more than 30 days. Takedown notices might
be responsible for only a fraction of pirated ﬁles
becoming unavailable. Most content objects have so
many mirrors that current levels of takedown requests
fail to render content unavailable.

• Anti-piracy measures implemented by OCHs appear to
successfully reduce piracy locally, but not globally as
long as the measures are not globally applied. Because
there are hundreds of OCHs and many of them are
located abroad, this approach has natural limits.

• The high diversity of the OCH ﬁle sharing ecosystem
means that shutting down a single actor, even if as
large as Megaupload, has little immediate effect on
ﬁle availability. Yet, such a precedent may cause an
increased perceived risk in the ecosystem.

V. DISCUSSION: SOPA

Given the limited effects of current anti-piracy efforts,
copyright owners have lobbied for the introduction of more
legal tools to combat piracy. The Stop Online Piracy Act
(SOPA) was proposed in the U.S. in October 2011. It
contained a notice-based takedown system against “foreign
U.S.-directed sites dedicated to the theft of U.S. property.”
The nature of these notices was similar to the DMCA, but
targeting entire sites instead of single infringing ﬁles.

The SOPA proposal consisted of two main provisions:
Interrupting the ﬂow of money to infringing sites, and
blocking user access to such sites. In detail, upon receipt of
a notice from a copyright holder, payment processors and
advertising services would have been required to end their
business relationship with the infringing site, and ISPs would
have been required to block their customers from accessing
the site. These measures were aimed at sites out of reach

of the U.S. justiciary and would have prevented them from
receiving visitors or funding coming from the U.S.

After protests, SOPA was put on hold in January 2012.
It was controversial for many reasons, including for giving
powers perceived as equivalent to direct executive action
to private rights holders, and for the risk of intentional or
unintentional misuse. By many, SOPA was also viewed as a
threat to freedom of speech in general. The purpose of this
paper is not to discuss these political views. Rather, our goal
is to discuss the pertinence of the proposed technical measures
with respect to the current state of the OCH ecosystem.
In fact, similar measures are currently being discussed in
other countries (e.g., in France [24]), and some anti-piracy
strategies are already being implemented by advertising and
payment services. Consequently, our discussion of these
approaches applies even beyond the scope of SOPA.

A. Disruption of Means of Financing

One-Click Hosters and indexing sites that are run for proﬁt,
but also many more altruistic sites, rely on external sources
of revenue to support their operation. A recent strategy is to
cut off these sites’ ability to receive funding, with the goal
of making them economically unviable so that the sites will
eventually cease operation. This strategy is also known to be
used against the online counterfeit pharmaceutical sector [6].
The two main sources of income for sites in the OCH
ecosystem are advertising and user subscriptions. Especially
indexing sites often rely exclusively on advertising, and
sometimes also on voluntary contributions by users and the
operators themselves. Major advertising providers such as
Google AdSense are known to ban piracy sites. Alternative
“underground” advertising networks are available and widely
used on ﬁle sharing sites, but it has been reported that they
may generate lower revenue than mainstream advertising
providers.16 In our experience, some of these underground
advertising networks can be difﬁcult to identify. Furthermore,
we have observed widespread advertisement
leading to
fake anti-virus software [25]. These characteristics raise the
question whether such services would react to SOPA-style
takedown notices. In fact, it seems probable that the status
quo would persist in terms of advertising on indexing sites.
For online payments, however, the situation is different.
OCHs are most dependent on this means of ﬁnancing as only
few indexing sites collect payments from their users. Recently,
PayPal modiﬁed their terms of service concerning hosting
providers, which effectively banned them from accepting
PayPal payments.17 While OCHs continue to accept credit
cards, they now process these payments through services

“Eleven

questions

for

a warez

site

owner,”

16Steve Bass,

http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9050203/Q A Eleven questions
for a warez site owner, 30 Nov. 2007.

17Ernesto, “PayPal Bans Major File-Hosting Services Over Piracy
Concerns,” http://torrentfreak.com/paypal-bans-major-ﬁle-hosting-services-
over-piracy-concerns-120710/, 10 Jul. 2012.

AVAILABLE PAYMENT OPTIONS (PMOS) ON OCHS AND THEIR

RESELLERS, ORDERED BY THEIR ALEXA RANK.

Table IV

OCH
Mediaﬁre
Depositﬁles
Uploaded
Putlocker
Hotﬁle
Turbobit
Rapidgator
Filefactory
Filegag

Rank
62
172
244
333
393
499
908
997
95,070

# PMOs OCH
2
5
7
2
5
3
9
4
2

# PMOs Resellers
> 9
> 100
99
> 5
> 45
> 50
> 9
> 11
-

other than PayPal, which accounted for 90 % of user payments
on some OCHs, according to the article. These developments
might eventually lead to a situation similar to underground
pharmacies. According to McCoy et al. [6], [5], only very
few banks process credit card payments for underground
pharmacies; these sites constantly run the risk of losing their
capability of accepting credit card payments and of forfeiting
funds held back by their payment processors.

A notable difference between OCHs and underground
pharmacies is that many OCHs allow payments through
resellers. These resellers are often listed on the web site of
the OCH and accept a very wide range of payment options,
as shown in Table IV. Payment methods include national
and international wire transfers, international credit cards
and other national payment cards, gift cards, and various
online currencies. Users make their payments directly to the
resellers and obtain a coupon code that they can redeem
on the OCH’s web site. While this system makes OCHs
less reliable on their own payment processing capability, in
our own experience it can be a tedious process for users.
Resellers are not always trustworthy, they sometimes charge
higher prices than the OCHs themselves, and some means
of online payment may incur additional fees. Consequently,
one would expect OCHs that lose the capability of accepting
direct payments to experience a noticeable drop in revenue.
The Usenet site Newzbin2, for instance, recently cited18 their
inability to accept payments as a reason for shutting down,
stating that the alternative means of payment “Bitcoin [was
not] credible as it [was] just too hard for 90 % of people.”
In other words, cutting off direct and convenient means of
payment appears to be a promising anti-piracy strategy.

In conclusion, OCHs are probably most vulnerable to anti-
piracy measures targeted at removing external sources of
revenue. Indexing sites may be less affected, especially those
that are less driven by (and reliant on) monetary gain.

18enigmax, “Newzbin2,

the MPAA’s Usenet Enemy # 1, Calls it
Quits,” http://torrentfreak.com/newzbin2-the-mpaas-usenet-enemy-1-calls-
it-quits-121129/, 29 Nov. 2012.

B. Access Blocking

If physically taking down a site is not feasible or too
time-consuming, blocking access to the site may appear to
be an attractive option. The two most common techniques
for blocking access to a destination are to either prevent the
DNS name from resolving to the associated IP address, or
to drop network trafﬁc based on the destination’s IP address.
Both techniques can be circumvented: Operators of blocked
sites can switch to another DNS name or IP address. Visitors
of blocked sites can either directly access the site’s IP address,
use a different DNS server, or use existing tools such as
VPNs, proxy servers, or anonymisation services such as Tor.
Such a measure will probably affect OCHs most heavily
because of their potentially large number of servers and their
higher bandwidth requirements. Indexing sites, on the other
hand, are more ﬂexible in changing their DNS name or IP
address. Their bandwidth requirements are rather modest so
that free services such as Tor or open proxies could be an
adequate means of accessing the sites.

While circumvention technology is commonly and freely
available today, it is an open question how many users would
install such software, and how much the trafﬁc to the blocked
sites would decline. As a ﬁrst result in the area of BitTorrent,
research from The Netherlands19 has shown that when access
to The Pirate Bay was blocked, there was no signiﬁcant effect
on BitTorrent piracy, suggesting that users have found and
are applying means to circumvent that anti-piracy measure.

C. Summary

According to our ﬁndings, OCHs are probably more
vulnerable to the anti-piracy strategies discussed in the
context of SOPA than are indexing sites. It is not clear,
however, whether OCHs would be the right target for SOPA-
style takedown notices. According to our law laymen’s
intuition, it appears to be more challenging to declare OCHs
as overall infringing or “dedicated to the theft of U.S.
property” than indexing sites. The latter typically openly
display the infringing content that they offer, while OCHs
tend to be more opaque, honour DMCA takedown notices,
and are also frequently used for entirely benign purposes.
Indexing sites, on the other hand, appear to be more resilient
against SOPA-style takedown notices. Hence, one may
criticise the proposed SOPA takedown regime for potentially
introducing an increased risk of abuse without being highly
effective against the truly infringing sites. Furthermore, some
of the anti-piracy strategies underlying SOPA are already
being deployed in a less far-reaching and less controversial
way than SOPA takedown notices.

Overall, the ﬁnancial and legal pressure on OCHs to step
up their anti-piracy efforts will probably increase. However,

19Ernesto, “Censoring The Pirate Bay is Useless, Research Shows,”

http://torrentfreak.com/censoring-the-pirate-bay-is-useless-research-
shows-120413/, 13 Apr. 2012.

less cooperative OCHs may drift into underground situations
similar to the providers of malware and spam-advertised
goods. Hence, it is highly likely that illegal ﬁle sharing based
on OCHs will not entirely go away, and that the arms race
between pirates and copyright enforcement will continue.

Given our ﬁndings that highlight the difﬁculties of reducing
the supply of pirated content, it appears to be promising to
follow a complementary strategy of reducing the demand for
pirated content, e.g., by providing legitimate offers that are
more attractive to consumers than pirating content.

VI. CONCLUSION

There is a cat-and-mouse game between uploaders and
copyright owners, where pirated content is being uploaded by
the former and deleted by the latter, and where new One-Click
Hosters and direct download sites are appearing while others
are being shut down. Currently, this game seems to be in
favour of the many pirates who provide far more content than
what the copyright owners are taking down. This imbalance
of powers, together with the size and diversity of the One-
Click Hosting ecosystem, suggest that anti-piracy laws to
reduce the availability and reachability of pirated content
may be less successful than what their proponents might
expect. On the other hand, strategies against economically
motivated actors may effectively target certain parts of the
ecosystem. Together with increased legal proceedings, we
expect them to render many OCHs more diligent, and maybe
even proactive, in their own anti-piracy efforts.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors express their gratitude to their shepherd Zhiyun
Qian and the anonymous reviewers for their precious time
and insightful feedback. Engin Kirda thanks Sy and Laurie
Sternberg for their generous support. This work has been
partially supported by Secure Business Austria.

This paper includes GeoLite data created by MaxMind,

available from http://www.maxmind.com/.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Kanich, C. Kreibich, K. Levchenko, B. Enright, G. M.
Voelker, V. Paxon, and S. Savage, “Spamalytics: An empirical
analysis of spam marketing conversion,” in CCS ’08. ACM,
Oct. 2008.

[2] K. Levchenko, A. Pitsillidis, N. Chachra, B. Enright,
M. F´elegyh´azi, C. Grier, T. Halvorson, C. Kanich, C. Kreibich,
H. Liu, D. McCoy, N. Weaver, V. Paxson, G. M. Voelker, and
S. Savage, “Click trajectories: End-to-end analysis of the
spam value chain,” in Symposium on Security & Privacy 2011.
IEEE, Mar. 2011.

[3] B. Stone-Gross, T. Holz, G. Stringhini, and G. Vigna, “The
underground economy of spam: A botmaster’s perspective
of coordinating large-scale spam campaigns,” in LEET ’11.
Usenix, Mar. 2011.

[4] C. Kanich, N. Weaver, D. McCoy, T. Halvorson, C. Kreibich,
K. Levchenko, V. Paxson, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage, “Show
me the money: Characterizing spam-advertised revenue,” in
USENIX Security 2011. Usenix, Aug. 2011.

[15] T. Lauinger, E. Kirda, and P. Michiardi, “Paying for piracy? An
analysis of one-click hosters’ controversial reward schemes,”
in RAID ’12. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, Sep. 2012,
pp. 169–189.

[5] D. McCoy, A. Pitsillidis, G. Jordan, N. Weaver, C. Kreibich,
B. Krebs, G. M. Voelker, S. Savage, and K. Levchenko, “Phar-
maLeaks: Understanding the business of online pharmaceutical
afﬁliate programs,” in USENIX Security 2012. Usenix, Aug.
2012.

[6] D. McCoy, H. Dharmdasani, C. Kreibich, G. M. Voelker, and
S. Savage, “Priceless: The role of payments in abuse-advertised
goods,” in CCS ’12. ACM, Oct. 2012.

[16] Z. Jelveh and K. Ross, “Proﬁting from ﬁlesharing: A mea-
surement study of economic incentives in cyberlockers,” in
P2P ’12.

IEEE, Sep. 2012.

[17] J. M. Urban and L. Quilter, “Efﬁcient process or “chilling
effects”? Takedown notices under section 512 of the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act,” Santa Clara Computer & High
Technology Law Journal, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 621–693, Jun.
2006.

[7] H. Fallmann, G. Wondracek, and C. Platzer, “Covertly probing
underground economy marketplaces,” in DIMVA ’10. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 101–110.

[18] A. Rehn, “The politics of contraband: The honor economies
of the warez scene,” Journal of Socio-Economics, vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 359–374, 2004.

[8] G. Wondracek, T. Holz, C. Platzer, E. Kirda, and C. Kruegel,
“Is the internet for porn? An insight into the online adult
industry,” in WEIS ’10, Jun. 2010.

[9] J. Caballero, C. Grier, C. Kreibich, and V. Paxson, “Measuring
pay-per-install: The commoditization of malware distribution,”
in USENIX Security 2011. Usenix, Aug. 2011.

[19] D. McCandless, “Warez world,” Telepolis, Jul. 2001.

[20] J. Howe, “The shadow Internet,” Wired, vol. 13, no. 01, Jan.

2005.

[21] J. Liang, R. Kumar, Y. Xi, and K. Ross, “Pollution in P2P
IEEE, Mar. 2005.

ﬁle sharing systems,” in INFOCOM ’05.

[10] D. Antoniades, E. Markatos, and C. Dovrolis, “One-click
hosting services: A ﬁle-sharing hideout,” in IMC ’09. ACM,
Nov. 2009.

[22] R. Cuevas, M. Kryczka, A. Cuevas, S. Kaune, C. Guerrero,
and R. Rejaie, “Is content publishing in BitTorrent altruistic
or proﬁt-driven?” in Co-NEXT ’10. ACM, Nov. 2010.

[11] A. Mahanti, C. Williamson, N. Carlsson, M. Arlitt, and
A. Mahanti, “Characterizing the ﬁle hosting ecosystem: A
view from the edge,” Performance Evaluation, vol. 68, no. 11,
pp. 1085–1102, Nov. 2011.

[12] J. Sanju`as-Cuxart, P. Barlet-Ros, and J. Sol´e-Pareta, “Mea-
surement based analysis of one-click ﬁle hosting services,”
Journal of Network and Systems Management, May 2011.

[13] A. Mahanti, N. Carlsson, and C. Williamson, “Content sharing
dynamics in the global ﬁle hosting landscape,” in MASCOTS
’12.

IEEE, Aug. 2012, pp. 219–228.

[14] N. Nikiforakis, M. Balduzzi, S. V. Acker, W. Joosen, and
D. Balzarotti, “Exposing the lack of privacy in ﬁle hosting
services,” in LEET ’11. Usenix, Mar. 2011.

[23] M. Kammerstetter, C. Platzer, and G. Wondracek, “Vanity,
cracks and malware: Insights into the anti-copy protection
ecosystem,” in CCS ’12. ACM, Oct. 2012.

[24] V. Bonneau and G. Fontaine, “Etude du mod`ele ´economique
de sites ou services de streaming et de t´el´echargement direct
de contenus illicites,” http://www.hadopi.fr/sites/default/ﬁles/
page/pdf/Rapport IDATE.pdf, Hadopi, France, Tech. Rep.,
Mar. 2012.

[25] B. Stone-Gross, R. Abman, R. Kemmerer, C. Kruegel, D. G.
Steigerwald, and G. Vigna, “The underground economy of
fake antivirus software,” in WEIS ’11, Jun. 2011.

