Neural Signatures of User-Centered Security:      
An fMRI Study of Phishing, and Malware Warnings 

Ajaya Neupane1, Nitesh Saxena1, Keya Kuruvilla2, Michael Georgescu1, and Rajesh Kana2 
1 Department of Computer and Information Sciences 

2 Department of Psychology 

University of Alabama at Birmingham 
{aneupane, saxena, mgeorges}@uab.edu 

University of Alabama at Birmingham 

{rkana, keyak}@uab.edu 

introduce  a  novel  neuroscience-based 

Abstract— The security of computer systems often relies upon 
decisions  and  actions  of  end  users.  In  this  paper,  we  set  out  to 
investigate  user-centered  security  by  concentrating  at  the  most 
fundamental  component  governing  user  behavior  –  the  human 
brain.  We 
study 
methodology  to  inform  the  design  of  user-centered  security 
systems.  Specifically,  we  report  on  an  fMRI  study  measuring 
users’  security  performance  and  the  underlying  neural  activity 
with  respect  to  two  critical  security  tasks:  (1)  distinguishing 
between  a  legitimate  and  a  phishing  website,  and  (2)  heeding 
security  (malware)  warnings.  At  a  higher  level,  we  identify 
neural  markers that  might be  controlling users’  performance in 
these  tasks,  and  establish  relationships  between  brain  activity 
and  behavioral  performance  as  well  as  between  users’ 
personality traits and security behavior. 

Our  results  provide  a  largely  positive  perspective  towards 
users’ capability and performance vis-à-vis these crucial security 
tasks.  First, we show that users exhibit significant brain activity 
in  key  regions  associated  with  decision-making,  attention,  and 
problem-solving  (phishing  and  malware  warnings)  as  well  as 
language comprehension and reading (malware warnings), which 
means  that  users  are  actively  engaged  in  these  security  tasks. 
Second,  we  demonstrate  that  certain  individual  traits,  such  as 
impulsivity  measured via an established questionnaire, can have 
a  significant  negative  effect  on  brain  activation  in  these  tasks. 
Third, we  discover  a  high  degree  of  correlation  in  brain  activity 
(in  decision-making  regions)  across  phishing  detection  and 
malware  warnings  tasks,  which  implies  that  users’  behavior  in 
one  task  may  potentially  be  predicted  by  their  behavior  in  the 
other  task.  Finally,  we  discuss  the  broader 
impacts  and 
implications  of  our  work  on  the  field  of  user-centered  security, 
including  the  domain  of  security  education,  targeted  security 
training, and security screening. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Computing  has  become  increasingly  common  in  many 

spheres of users’ daily lives. At the same time, the need for 

Permission  to  freely  reproduce  all  or  part  of  this  paper  for  noncommercial 
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited 
without  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Internet  Society,  the  first-named 
author (for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if 
the paper was prepared within the scope of employment. 
NDSS ’14 23-26 February 2014, San Diego, CA, USA 
Copyright 2014 Internet Society. ISBN I-891562-35-5 
(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:29)(cid:18)(cid:18)(cid:71)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:18)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:18)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:25)

securing computer systems has become paramount. To enable 
secure  on-line  interactions,  actions  performed  and  decisions 
made by human users need to be factored into system design – 
a  principle  sometimes  referred  to as  “human  in  the  loop” [9]. 
Two  such  prominent  user-centered  security  tasks  are:  (1) 
distinguishing  between  a  legitimate  and  a  fake  web-site 
(phishing  detection  task),  and  (2)  heeding  warnings  provided 
by modern browsers when connecting to potentially malicious 
web-sites (malware warnings task). User attitudes, perceptions, 
acceptance and use of information technology have been long-
standing  issues  since  the  early  days  of  computing.  This  is 
especially  true  in  secure  computing  since  user  behavior  can 
directly or indirectly impact the security of the system. In this 
light, it is important to understand users’ behavior in executing 
security tasks and their potential susceptibility to attacks. 

The 

security  has 

field  of  user-centered 

received 
considerable  attention  recently  but  is  still  in  its  infancy.  As 
such, our understanding of end user performance in real-world 
security  tasks  is  not  very  precise  or  clear  at  this  point.  A 
number  of  computer  lab-based  studies  focusing  on  security 
warnings and security indicators (e.g., [10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17]) came to the conclusion that users hardly perform well at 
these tasks and often ignore them. This general wisdom in this 
area has been called into question by a recent large-scale field 
study  of  modern  browsers’  phishing,  SSL  and  malware 
warnings  [11],  which  showed  that  users  actually  heed  these 
warnings with high likelihood.  

In this paper, we set out to enhance the current knowledge 
in,  and  address  fundamental  questions  pertaining  to,  user-
centered  security  from  a  neuropsychological  standpoint.  The 
primary questions driving our research include: (1) whether or 
not users actively engage in security tasks; (2) do users ignore 
or  bypass  these  tasks;  (3)  what  brain  regions  get  activated 
while  performing  these  tasks;  (4)  how  well  users  perform  at 
these  tasks;  (5)  whether  certain  personality  traits  influence 
users’  security  behavior  and  performance;  and  (6)  is  users’ 
behavior in one task related to their behavior in another task.  

In  an  attempt  to  answer  these  inquiries,  we  introduce  a 
novel  methodology  for  studying  user-centered  security  –  one 
that  involves  neuroimaging.  By  means  of  this  general 
methodology,  our  overarching  goal  is  to  delineate  the  nature 
of  cognitive  and  neural  processes  that  underlie  user-centered 
security decisions and actions. This specific goal in our work 
reported  in  this  paper  is  achieved  via  fMRI  (functional 

Magnetic  Resonance  Imaging)  scanning.  fMRI  provides  a 
unique  opportunity  to  examine  the  brain  responses,  in-vivo, 
mediating  user  decisions  during  human-computer  security 
interactions.  As  a  first  line  of  investigation  into  our  novel 
methodology,  this  fMRI  study  will  shed  light  on  end  users’ 
behavior and performance with respect to the important tasks 
of phishing detection  and malware warnings. 

Contributions  &  Results  Summary: Our main contributions 
in this paper are summarized as follows: 

1.  Novel  Methodology  to  Study  User-Centered  Security: We 
propose  a  new  generalized  methodology  for  studying 
neurological  patterns  governing  users’  performance  and 
behavior with respect to user-centered security tasks. 

2.  fMRI  Study  of  Phishing,  and  Malware  Warnings:  As  a 
specific use case of our methodology, we design and develop 
in-scanner  fMRI  experiments  for  phishing  detection  and 
malware  warnings  tasks  (Section  III),  and  conduct  a  user 
study  by  recruiting  and  scanning  25  individuals  performing 
these tasks. (Section IV) 
3.  Comprehensive  Neural  and  Behavioral  Analysis:  We 
provide  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  neuroimaging  and 
behavioral  data,  not  only  evaluating  the  phishing  and 
malware  warnings  experiments 
independently  but  also 
contrasting them with each other. (Section V-VII) 
The  results  of  our  study  provide  a  largely  positive 
perspective  towards  users’  capability  and  performance  with 
respect  to  phishing  detection  and  malware  warnings  tasks. 
First,  we  show  that  users  exhibit  significant  brain  activity  in 
key  regions  associated  with  decision-making,  attention,  and 
problem-solving  (phishing  and  malware  warnings)  as  well  as 
language  comprehension  and  reading  (malware  warnings), 
which means that users are actively engaged in these tasks. In 
case  of  malware  warnings,  this  level  of  brain  activation 
matched  with  users’  good  task  performance  reflected  by  the 
behavioral  data  (confirming  the  findings  reported  in  [11]).  In 
case of the phishing task, however, the behavioral performance 
was  poor  despite  significant  activation  in  brain  regions 
correlated with higher order cognitive processing.  Second, we 
demonstrate 
traits,  specifically 
impulsivity measured via a simple questionnaire [1], can have 
a significant negative effect on brain activation in these tasks. 
In  other  words,  impulsive  individuals  showed  lower  brain 
activation and may thus have poor task performance. Third, we 
discover  a  high  degree  of  correlation  in  brain  activity  (with 
respect  to  decision-making  regions)  across  phishing  detection 
and  malware  warnings  tasks,  which  implies  that  users’ 
behavior  in  one  task  may  potentially  be  predicted  by  their 
behavior  in  the  other  task.    Finally,  we  discuss  the  broader 
impact  and  implications  of  our  work  to  the  field  of  user-
centered  security,  including  the  domain  of  security  education, 
targeted security training, and security screening. 

II.  BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

that  certain  personality 

In  this  section,  we  provide  the  background  necessary  to 
understand our experiments and study design, and discuss the 
ethical aspects and prior work relevant to our research. 

  2

A. 

fMRI Overview 
fMRI  (Functional  MRI) 

is  derived 

function  measure,  and 

is  a  Blood  Oxygen  Level 
Dependent 
from  a 
combination of stimulus-induced changes in the local cerebral 
blood flow, local blood volume, and local oxygen consumption 
rate  [5].  It  is  assumed  that  such  changes  are  associated  with 
changes  in  neuronal  activity  [6]  and  thus  fMRI  provides  an 
indirect  measure  of  the  underlying  neuronal  activity.  In 
contrast  to  other  brain  scanning  approaches,  such  as  EEG, 
fMRI  has  a  much  better  spatial  resolution.  In  an  fMRI  scan, 
human  participants lie  down  in  the  MRI  scanner and perform 
cognitive tasks while their brain activity is being measured. In 
this way, we can time-lock the participant’s brain activity to a 
certain  cognitive  event.  fMRI  is  an  appealing  platform  to 
conduct  small-scale  studies  providing  high  spatial  resolution. 
In  sum,  fMRI  measures  brain  activity  by  detecting  related 
changes in blood flow. 

B.  Our Experimental Set-Up 

Throughout the project, the fMRI data was acquired using 
the  3T  Siemens  Allegra  Scanner  available  to  us  at  Civitan 
International Research Center at the University of Alabama in 
Birmingham,  our  University  (see  Figure  1)  depicting  our 
scanner and the experimental set-up). All fMRI tasks followed 
the  same  data  acquisition  protocol  as  follows.  For  functional 
imaging,  we  used  a  single-shot  gradient-recalled  echo-planar 
pulse  sequence  that  offers  the  advantage  of  rapid  image 
acquisition (Repetition Time = 1000 ms, Echo Time = 30 ms, 
flip angle = 60 degrees, Field of View = 24 cm, matrix = 64 x 
64). This sequence covers most of the cortex (seventeen 5-mm 
thick slices with a 1 mm gap) in a single cycle of scanning (1 
TR) with an in-plane resolution of 3.75 x 3.75 x 5 mm3. 

C.  Ethical and Safety Considerations 

Fig. 1 A pilot subject being prepared for the scan  

 

Our study was approved by the Institutional Review Board 
(IRB)  at  our  University.  Care  was  taken  to  maximize  the 
safety  of  the  participants  while  being  scanned  by  following 
standard practices. Their participation in the study was strictly 
voluntary.  The  participants  signed  an  informed  consent  form 
prior to the study and were given the option to withdraw from 
the study at any point of time. Best practices were followed to 
protect  the  confidentiality  and  privacy  of  participants’  data 
acquired during the study by de-identifying the collected data. 

D.  Study Limitations, and Sample Size 

In line with any other study involving human subjects, our 
study  also  had  certain  limitations.  A  primary  limitation 
pertains to the constraints posed by the fMRI experimental set 
up. Since the participants were performing the tasks inside the 

fMRI  scanner,  the  set  up  did  not  mimic  real-world  online 
browsing  experience.  The  discomfort  associated  with  lying 
down in a supine position and being stationary may have also 
impacted participants’ brain activity. In addition, just the fact 
that  the  participants  were  being  scanned,  may  have  impacted 
their  brain  activation  and  behavioral 
responses.  The 
constrained  interface  (image-based  display,  binary  input  and 
no internet connectivity, unlike a modern computer) available 
during  the  scans  may  have  limited  participants’  interactions 
with the system. For example, the participants were presented 
with  the  images  of  the  websites  (rather  than  the  websites 
themselves)  in  the  phishing  task.  Similarly,  the  malware 
warning images that could be shown on the displays were very 
simplistic  and  rudimentary.  We  believe  that  this  may    have 
negatively 
the 
underlying  security  tasks.  Furthermore,  participants’  head 
motion in the MRI scanner, although we have corrected for it 
(Section  V.A),  may  have  impacted  the  fMRI  data  quality. 
Finally,  the  lab-based  environment  of  the  study  may  have 
impacted participants’ behavior as they may not have felt real 
security risks during the experiments.  

affected  participants’  performance 

in 

The effective sample size used in our study ranged from 22 
(phishing  detection  task)  to  25  (malware  warnings  task) 
participants (see Section V.A), which previous power analysis 
studies  have  found  to  be  optimal.  For  instance,  statistical 
power  analysis  of  event-related  design  fMRI  studies  has 
demonstrated  that  80%  of  clusters  of  activation  proved 
reproducible  with  a  sample  size  of  20  subjects  [56].  Another 
study  [55]  found  that  a  sample  size  of  24  gave  an  accurate 
activation  map  with  a  sufficient  level  of  power  (i.e.,  an  80% 
true  positive  rate).  Thus,  the  number  of  participants  tested  in 
our experiments was optimal for event-related studies. 

E.  Related Work 

Our  study  centers  on  phishing  detection  and  malware 
warnings. Most closely relevant to the phishing component of 
our study is the lab study reported by Dhamija et al. [10] with 
22  participants,  which  asked  the  participants  to  distinguish 
between  real  and  fake  web-sites.  Their  results  indicated  that 
users  do  not  do  well  at  this  task  and  make  incorrect  choices 
40%  of  the  time.  Our  behavioral  data  also  yielded  similar 
results.  However,  our  neuroimaging  data  shows  that  users 
exhibit significant brain activation during fake or real website 
identification task. This suggests that although the outcome of 
the participants’ efforts to differentiate between  fake and real 
web sites may not be good (perhaps because they do not know 
what  to  look  for  on  the  sites  to  make  this  decision),  they 
certainly  seem  to  be  making  a  considerable  effort  in  solving 
these puzzles as reflected by their brain activity in appropriate 
brain regions during this decision-making process. 

The only prior study that focuses on malware warnings is a 
very  recent  large  scale  field  study  reported  by  Akhawe  and 
Felt  [11].  This  study  used  modern  browsers’  telemetry 
frameworks 
to  record  users’  real-world  behavior  when 
interacting  with  malware  (as  well  as  phishing  and  SSL) 
warnings.  Unlike  previously  conducted  lab-based  studies  of 
security warnings and security indicators (see below), this new 
study demonstrated that users heed warnings most of the time. 
Specifically,  they  found  that  users  ignore  Chrome’s  and 

  3

Firefox’s  phishing  and  malware  warnings  only  9-23%  of  the 
time,  and  ignored  Firefox’s  SSL  warnings  33%  of  the  time. 
These  results  are  very  much  in  line  with  the  results  of  our 
study,  which  provides  neurological  proof  as  to  the  users’ 
capability to process and heed malware warnings.  

For  over  a  decade,  many  lab  studies  have  focused  on 
different  browser  security  indicators  (passive  indicators,  and 
active warnings for phishing and SSL attacks) [12, 13, 14, 15, 
16,  17].  All  of  these  studies  suggested  that  users  seldom  act 
upon  warnings  and  security  indicators.  (We  refer  to  Akhawe 
and Felt [11] who provide an excellent survey of the results of 
these studies). Akhawe and Felt attributed the stark difference 
in  the  results  of  prior  lab  studies  focusing  on  warnings,  and 
their  own  field  study  of  [11]  mainly  to  the  changes  in  the 
nature of the browser warnings.  

users’ 

behavior  when 

A previous neuroimaging study somewhat relevant to our 
work was performed by Craig et al. [18]. This study aimed at 
understanding 
faced  with 
advertisements,  including  the  level  of  suspicion  aroused  by  
deceptive  advertising.  Their  study  found  precuneus  and 
superior 
temporal  sulcus  activation  while  participants 
processed  different  levels  of  deceptive  stimuli.  This  has 
relevance  to  user-centered  online  security  interactions,  as 
users  may  become  suspicious  when  they  encounter  phishing 
sites or connect to malware-prone websites. While the Craig et 
al  study  points  to  the  cognitive  dangers  associated  with 
moderately  deceptive  materials,  our  phishing  task  presents 
participants with a real life online security scenario where they 
have to determine whether the website is malicious or real.  

There  have  been  other  studies  that  applied  neuroscience 
principles  to  computer  security  problems,  e.g.,  [19,  20,  52, 
53].  Bojinov  et  al.  [19]  proposed  a  neuroscience-inspired 
approach to coercion-resistant authentication. Martinovic et al. 
[20]  explored  the  feasibility  of  side  channels  attacks  with 
commodity brain-computer interfaces. Thorpe et al. [52], and 
Chung  et  al.  [53]  explored  user  authentication  using  EEG 
devices. 

III.  DESGIN OF EXPERIMENTS 

two  experiments,  one 

The in-scanner phase of our within-subjects fMRI study is 
comprised  of 
involving  phishing 
detection and one involving malware warnings. In this section, 
we discuss the methodology, and design and implementation of 
these experiments. Since these experiments were implemented 
using E-Prime [2], we begin by providing an overview of this 
software platform. 

A.  E-Prime Overview 

To  develop  our  fMRI  experiments,  we  used  the  E-Prime 
software  (Psychology  Software  Tools  Inc.,  Pittsburgh).  E-
Prime  is  a  framework  for  designing  and  implementing 
experiments,  and  collecting  the  participant  response  data  and 
exporting this data to different formats for analysis. E-Prime is 
a  suite  of  applications,  namely,  E-Studio,  E-Run,  E-Basic,  E-
Merge  and  E-DataAid,  where  E-Studio 
is  a  graphical 
environment, E-Basic is the scripting language for E-studio, E-
Run  is  for  running  the  environments,  E-Merge is  for  merging 
session  data  files  into  Multi-Session  data  files and  E-DataAid 

is  for  managing  data  [2].  E-Studio  supports  creation  of 
experimental environment.  It consists of:  

and properties. It has drag and drop functionality to use the 
objects from its framework in the experiment. Inline scripts 
can  be  written  in  E-basic  to  control  the  execution  flow  of 
those objects.  

1.  interface:  a  combination  of  toolbox,  workspace,  structure 
2.  frames:  an  event  in  the  experiment  that  includes  text  or 
3.  trials: collection of frames which forms stimuli in the form 
4.  blocks: collection of trials.  
5.  procedure: used to arrange the frames, trials and blocks in a 

images which run for a certain amount of time. 

of images and text.  

specific order, following a linear time-line. 
As  a  general practice,  while  developing experiments in E-
Prime, one starts with a procedure called Session Procedure. It 
runs  for  a  session and  holds all other  objects  for that  session. 
Instructions,  blocks  and  trials  are  then  included  in  the 
procedure. The time duration of all objects can be fixed as per 
the  requirement  of  the  experiment.  An  MRI  compatible  IFIS-
SA (Invivo Corp., Gainesville, FL) auditory and visual system 
is  available  for  stimulus  presentation  at  the  neuroimaging 
facility  at  our  University.  This  system  consists  of  two 
computers:  one  for  stimulus  presentation  and  another  for 
experimental  control  and  analysis.  A  master  control  unit  is 
used to interface the two computers. We use E-Prime software 
run  on  the  IFIS-SA  system  to  present  visual  and  auditory 
stimuli.  The  visual  display  in  the  magnet  utilizes  an  IFIS-SA 
LCD video screen located behind the head-coil that  is viewed 
through a mirror attached to the radio frequency (RF) coil. The 
auditory  stimuli,  if  any,  are  presented  using  MR-compatible 
pneumatic headphones. The auditory stimuli and video display 
can  be  controlled  using  the  master  control  unit  within  the 
scanner’s control room. MRI compatible response boxes (e.g., 
joysticks  and  button  boxes)  are  available  within  our 
neuroimaging center. The E-Prime IFIS-SA systems record the 
reaction times as well as participant response to each stimulus 
item  presented  to  the  subject  in  the  scanner,  and  creates  data 
files titled e-dat and t-dat. 

The  visual  display  in  the  MRI  scanner  used  in  our 
experiments (Section II.B) had the resolution of 640*480  and 
thus  the  interface  for  all  the  experiments  were  designed  to  fit 
that resolution. Moreover, since E-Prime only supports a 16-bit 
Bitmap  Image  format,  all  snapshots  used  in  the  experiments 
were  converted  to  Bitmap  keeping  the  visual  integrity  of  the 
stimuli intact. 

B.  Phishing and Phishing Control 

Phishing  is  the  act  of  deceiving  people  by  presenting  a 
fake website which looks like a real one. For this experiment, 
we  identified  websites  which  are  popular  among  people,  and 
took the snapshots of the sites’ login pages. We modified the 
login  pages  of  these  websites,  created  fraudulent  replications 
of them and took snapshots of them. The snapshots were then 
categorized  into  two  types:  “real”  and  “fake.”  The  fake 
website  snapshots  were  further  divided  into  two  categories: 
“easy” and “difficult.” The easy  sites are those  for  which  we 
modified  both  the  URL  and  the  logo  of  the  companies; 
keeping  the  layout  of  webpages  intact;  or  we  changed  the 

  4

URL of the webpages to an IP address. The difficult sites were 
those  for  which  we  modified  just  the  URL  keeping  the 
security icons and parameters intact. Table I provides a sample 
list  of  the  websites  used  in  the  experiment  along  with  their 
URLs. The sites were mainly chosen based on their expected 
popularity  among  our  participants.  Figure  2(a)  and  2(b) 
provide  a  sample  of  how  these  websites  images  looked  for 
easy and difficult trials, respectively. We obtained some of the 
URLs  from  the  website  www.phishtank.com.  The  design  of 
fake  websites,  for  this  experiment,  was  similar  to  the  design 
adopted  in  the  previous  study  on  phishing  detection  reported 
by Dhamija et al. [8].   

Figure 2(a): sample image “difficult” (URL different compared to real) 

 

             
Figure 2(b): Sample image “easy” (logo and URL different compared to real) 

 

1)  Experiment  Design  (Phishing):  The  phishing  experiment 
followed  an  event-related  (ER)  design.  In  ER  design,  each 
trial  is  presented  as  an  event  with  longer  inter-trial-interval. 
This  was  done  with  the  goal  of  isolating  fMRI  response  to 
each  item  separately.  Event-related  designs  allow  different 
trials  to  be  presented  in  random  sequences,  eliminating 
potential  confounds,  such  as  habituation,  anticipation,  set,  or 
other  strategy  effects  [51].  In  this  experiment,  we  had  39 
trials, out of  which 3 trials (presented at the beginning of the 
experiment)  were  considered  as  practice  trials  to  familiarize 
the  subjects  with  the  task.  During  the  task,  the  subjects  were 
asked to determine whether a given snapshot of a website was 
“fake” or “real.” 

In  addition  to  trials  involving  real  and  fake  websites,  the 
experiment  had  a  fixation  baseline  condition,  each  of  which 
lasted  for  10s.  Fixations, 
in  the  context  of  an  fMRI 
experiment, are short blocks of time when the participants are 
asked to look at a cross on the screen and relax. Fixations are 
considered  as  windows  of  baseline  brain  activity.  Each  trial 

displayed a  website snapshot  for 6s  followed by a  gap of  6s. 
There were 12 trials involving “easy” fake websites, 13 trials 
involving “difficult” fake websites, and 14 trials involving real 
websites.  The  experiment  started  with  the  set  of  instructions 
followed  by  a  fixation  for  10s,  and  after  every  6  trials,  a 
fixation of 10s was displayed on the screen. Thus, there was a 
fixation  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment,  at  the  end,  and 
after  every  6  trials.  The  trials  were  presented  to  each 
participant  in  a  randomized  order  and  the  participants  had  to 
express whether the site depicted in the snapshot was “real” or 
“fake”  by  pressing  the  designated  button.  We  recorded  the 
response given by users and the corresponding response time. 

2)  Experiment  Design  (Phishing  Control):  The  phishing 
control  experiment  was  designed  as  a  control  for  the  stimuli 
presented  in  the  phishing  experiment.  This  experiment  was 
identical  to  the  phishing  experiment,  except  that  participants 
were  instructed  to  just  look  at  the  images  displayed  on  the 
screen,  and  not  to  engage  in  an  active  task.  Thus,  this 
experiment  had  all  the  visual  demands  of  the  phishing 
experiment  except  for  the  decision-making  (real  or  fake 
website)  aspect.  In  this  experiment,  20  snapshots  of  login 
pages of different websites, including: Citibank, USPS, orkut, 
hi5,  6pm.com,google,  bankofAmerica, 
  LinkedIn,  chase, 
instagram,  coupons,  spotify,  onlineshoes,  Hotmail,  BestBuy, 
yahoo,  discover,  AT&T,  and  Apple  and  a  portal  of  our 
University, were shown to the participants. In this experiment,  
we  were examining the brain responses  when users  were just 
looking at the webpages, and we subtracted those signals from 
the signals we captured from the phishing experiment.  

TABLE I. SAMPLE LIST OF WEBSITES USED IN THE PHISHING EXPERIMENT (NOT 

SHOWN IN THE TABLE ARE OUR UNIVERSITY RELATED SITES, INCLUDING 

BLACKBOARD AND OTHER PORTALS) 

Website 

Amazon 

WellsFargo  

eBay 

PayPal 

Regions Bank 

Twitter 
NetFlix 

URL 

http://www.amazon.1click.com/exec/flex-sign-
in.com.ch 
www.vvellsfargo.com 
http://91.109.13.183/~ebay/security/ 
http://paypal-verification.com.us.cgi-
bin.webscr.cmd.login-
submit.dispatch.5885d80a13c17421571527861751275
287527525.hargaperumahan.com/ 
https://bank.secured/regions-bank/login/index.html 
https://twitter.login.com 
https://signup-netfiix.com/#do-login 
http://securitycenter.3dn.ru/facebook/warning/account/
suspend/index.html 
https://accounts-google.com/servicelogin?service=mail 

Facebook 

C.  Malware Warnings 

Gmail 

 

Malware is software created to obtain unauthorized access 
to  computer  resources  and  collect  private  information.  We 
wanted to identify the neural patterns when people respond to 
warnings associated with malware. Modern browsers use these 
warning  mechanisms  to  alert  users  in  case  they  visit  a  likely 
suspicious web site [11] and rely upon users’ input to proceed. 
Our  malware  warnings  experiment  consisted  of  several 
snapshots  of  news  samples  and  pop-ups  of  two  types:  non-
warnings  and  warnings.  A  non-warning  pop-up  contained 
casual  information  or  questions  in  it,  and  a  warning  pop-up 

  5

contained  details  about  the  malware  threat.  In  this  way,  the 
non-warning  pop-up  served  as  a  control  condition  for  the 
warning  pop-up.  The  article  itself  served  the  purpose  of  a 
primary  task  the  user  is  engaged  in.  The  news  samples  were 
collected from popular news websites such as CNN, BBC, LA 
Times, ABC News, and Slashdot.org. We collected news items 
from  all  major  categories  like  entertainment,  sports,  politics, 
and general news. We recreated the web pages on our own as 
the  E-Prime  software  only  supports  a  resolution  of  640*480 
formatted  in  Bitmap  configuration.  We  simulated  the  real-
website  by  showing  abstracts  of 
the  news  first.  The 
participants can click on the read more option to read the full 
news item. When they clicked on “full news” we showed them 
a  pop-up  with  a  warning/non-warning  asking  them  if  they 
wanted  to  proceed.  Depending  upon  their  response,  the  next 
populated page was either a full news article or a blank page. 

Experiment  Design  (Malware  Warnings):  This  task  required 
that the subject read a series of articles. While they are reading 
the  articles,  they  were  randomly  interrupted  by  a  pop-up 
asking  a  specific  question  (non-warning),  or  by  a  pop-up 
warning (about a malicious threat).   

Fig 3(a). A Snapshot of Non-Warning 

 

 

Fig 3(b). A Snapshot of Warning 

The  experiment  started  with  the  instructions  set  followed 
by a fixation trial of 10s. After the fixation, the abstract with 
“read  more”  link  was  presented  for  10s  and  when  the  user 
clicked on read more, a pop-up (warning or non-warning) was 
generated  asking  the  user  if  he/she  wanted  to  proceed.  If  the 
user  chose  not  to  proceed,  a  blank  screen  was  displayed  for 
10s, otherwise, a full news article was displayed for 10s. This 
was  an  event-based  design  and  the  user  gave  his  input  of 
yes/no  by  pressing  the  button.  We  incorporated  the  malware 
warnings  of  popular  web  browsers  like  Chrome,  Internet 
Explorer,  Opera,  and  Mozilla  [11].  It  was  difficult  to  display 
all  the  details  of  warnings  that  are  shown  by  these  browsers 
but we kept, to the extent possible, the excerpts similar to the 

warnings of these browsers. And the pop-ups contained casual 
messages,  such  as,  “We  are  collecting  the  details  about  the 
type  of  news  you  like.  Do  you  like  these  sorts  of  articles.” 
Figure 3(a) and 3(b) are samples of how the snapshots of the 
pop-ups looked. 

IV.  STUDY PROCEDURES 

Our  fMRI  study  followed  a  within-subjects  design, 
whereby  each  participant  performed  all  the  three  tasks, 
phishing  control,  phishing,  and  malware  warnings.  All  tasks 
were  performed  in  one  single  fMRI  scanning  session.  The 
study,  including  participant  recruitment  and  MRI  scanning, 
ran for a period of about 6 months. In the rest of this section, 
we  present  the  details  of  our  study  protocol,  including  the 
recruitment  and  demographics  of  our  study  participants,  and 
the procedures involved during the pre-scanning and scanning 
phases of the study.  

A.  Participant Recruitment & Demographics 

Twenty five  healthy  university students (14  males and 11 
females;  mean  age:   21.5  years)  participated  in  our  fMRI 
study.  Participant demographic information is summarized in 
Table  II.  The  participating  students  were  enrolled  in  various 
educational  programs,  including:  Biology,  Music,  Athletics, 
Psychology,  Communication  Studies,  Physical  Education, 
Biomedical  Engineering,  Pathology,  Physical  Therapy, 
Mathematics,  Medicine,  and  Computer  and  Information 
Sciences, forming a diverse sample.  

TABLE II.    PARTICIPANT DEMOGRAPHICS SUMMARY 

Gender 
Age Range 
Handedness 
Race 

Non-Native English Speakers 

 

N=25 

14 male;  11  female 
19 – 32 years 
24 right-handed; 1 left-handed 
13 Caucasian; 5 Hispanic; 6 Asian; 1 
African American 
7 

Some  of  these  participants  were  recruited  through  a 
screening  questionnaire  administered  to  students  enrolled  in 
the  Introduction  to  Psychology  course  in  the  Department  of 
Psychology  at  our  University.  Participants  were  not  included 
if they indicated having metal implanted in their bodies (either 
surgically  or  accidentally),  indicated  possibly  being  pregnant 
or currently breastfeeding, or indicated having had a history of 
kidney  disease,  seizure  disorder,  diabetes,  hypertension, 
anemia, or sickle cell disease. Individuals were also excluded 
if 
taking  psychotropic  medications,  had 
claustrophobia, or had hearing problems. Participants were not 
recruited  if  they  indicated  a  history  of  a  developmental 
cognitive  disorder,  anxiety  disorder,  schizophrenia,  or 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Some of the participants were 
also recruited via flyers posted on our University campus, and 
prospective participants could call a number listed on the flyer 
and  answer  a  screening  questionnaire  by  dialing 
in 
information through integrated voice response (IVR). 

they  were 

  6

B.  Pre-Scanning Phase  

The  scans  were  performed  at  the  neuroimaging  facility 
available  to  us  at  our  University.  Participants  signed  an 
informed  consent 
form  approved  by  our  University’s 
Institutional Review Board. In addition, participants filled out 
an  Edinburgh  Handedness  form  [54],  an  MRI  safety 
questionnaire,  and  a  Barratt’s  Impulsivity  questionnaire  [1]. 
The  purpose  of  the  handedness  form  was  to  determine 
handedness  because  handedness  may 
the 
lateralization of hemispheric activity in the participants (right-
handed individuals may be more left-lateralized). The purpose 
of  the  impulsivity  questionnaire  was  to  determine  the  trait 
impulsivity  level  of  the  participants  (details  provided  in 
Section V.A). 

relate 

to 

Prior  to  the  scan,  each  participant  was  shown  example 
images  for  both  the  tasks  (phishing  detection,  and  malware 
warnings) in the form of images on paper. We also explained 
that  the  participant  was  to  use  the  button  response  system  in 
the MRI scanner during the tasks.  

We did not tell the participants before the fMRI scan as to 
what  they  are  supposed  to  be  doing  in  the  phishing 
experiment.  This  was  to  make  sure  that  they  were  not 
influenced  by  the  “real”  or  “fake”  decision-making  thoughts 
while engaged in the phishing control experiment. The image 
for  the  phishing  control  experiment  was  a  screenshot  of  the 
Google home page. The image we showed to the participants 
for the malware experiment is one of the articles displayed in 
a browser pop-up asking a general question about the article.  
See  Figures  2(a),  2(b),  3(a),  and  3(b)  for  examples  shown  to 
the  participants.  We  did  not  show  an  example  of  a  malware 
warning  pop–up  to  the  participants  before  the  experiment  in 
order to avoid priming them explicitly. 

C.  Scanning Phase  

fMRI  data  was  collected  using  a  Siemens  3.0  T  Allegra 
head-only scanner (as discussed in Section II.B). For structural 
imaging,  initial  high  resolution  T1-weighted  scans  were 
acquired  using  a  160-slice  3D  MPRAGE  (Magnetization 
Prepared  Rapid  Gradient  Echo)  volume  scan  with  TR  =  200 
ms, TE = 3.34 ms, flip angle = 1210, FOV = 25.6 cm, 256 x 
256  matrix  size,  and  1  mm  slice  thickness.  A  single-shot 
gradient-recalled  echo-planar  pulse  sequence  was  used  to 
acquire  functional  images  (TR  =  1000  ms,  TE  =  30  ms,  flip 
angle=600,  FOV  =  24  cm,  matrix  =  64  x  64).  Seventeen 
adjacent  oblique  axial  slices  were  acquired  in  an  interleaved 
sequence with 5 mm slice thickness, 1 mm slice gap, a 24 x 24 
cm field of view (FOV), and a 64 x 64 matrix, resulting in an 
in-plane resolution of 3.75 x 3.75 x 5 mm3. 

For  each  participant,  we  set  the  order  of  the  phishing  and 
malware warnings tasks randomly, but always left the phishing 
control as the first task. We gave appropriate instructions to the 
participants  via  an  intercom  before  each  experiment  started. 
Instructions were also provided visually on the display screen 
in  the  MRI  scanner  at  the  beginning  of  each  task.  Each  task 
was  run  through  the  IFIS  System  Manager. Participants  made 
their responses using a fiber optic button response system that 
had  a  button  for  each  finger  on  both  hands.  They  indicated  a 
“yes”  response  using  their  right  index  finger  and  a  “no” 

response  using  their  left  index  finger.  The  session  start  time, 
end  time,  session  id,  and  the  order  that  each  task  was 
performed  were  recorded.  For  each  task,  except  the  phishing 
control  experiment, 
times  and  answers  were 
automatically  recorded  and  saved  as  dat  files.  The  total 
duration  for  the  phishing  control,  phishing  and  malware 
warnings tasks were 268s, 553s, and 751s.  

reaction 

After  the  scanning  phase  was  over,  we  compensated  the 
participant  with  Psychology  course  credits  or  a  $50  cash 
reward depending on their status.    

V.  ANALYSIS AND STUDY RESULTS 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the 
data  acquired  during  our  study  and  attempt  to  interpret  the 
results. We report on the neuroimaging data analysis followed 
by the behavioral data analysis 

A.  Neuroimaging Data Analysis 

superimposed  on  normalized  T1-weighted  images.  All  data 
were  intensity-thresholded  at  p=0.001,  with  a  cluster  size 
correction  per  region  for  a  family  wise  error  (FWE)  rate  of 
0.05.  To  determine  the  voxel  threshold  for  significance,  a 
minimum cluster thresholding operation was performed using 
the  AlphaSim  software  package  in  AFNI  (Analysis  of 
Functional  Neuroimages)  [57].  Ten-thousand  Monte  Carlo 
simulations  were  generated  to  maintain  the  family  wise  error 
(FWE)  rate  at  0.05  for  the  whole  brain.  Thus,  in  order  for  a 
given  region  to  be  considered  significantly  active,  it  should 
have a minimum cluster size of 64mm3. 

Table III lists the acronyms we will be using in the rest of 
the  paper  for 
the  brain  regions  associated  with  our 
experiments.  The  figure  below  provides  a  higher  level 
overview of these different regions and their general role. 

 

using 

the 

Free 

Surfer 

software 

(Wellcome  Trust  Centre 

All  acquired  fMRI  images  were  converted  from  DICOM 
(Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) format to 
NIFTI  (Neuroimaging  Informatics  Technology  Initiative) 
format 
software 
(http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/).  Data  was  preprocessed 
using  SPM8 
for 
Neuroimaging,  London,  United  Kingdom)  within  MATLAB 
and  an  in-house  software.  Functional  data  preprocessing 
started with slice time correction to account for the interleaved 
pattern  of  scan  slice  acquisition.  All  slices  were  realigned  to 
the mean image in the scan. All images were then normalized 
to  the  EPI  template  provided  by  SPM8  using  a  2mm3 
resampling  voxel.  Head  motion  was  examined  in  three 
translational  directions  x,  y,  and  z,  and  three rotations:  pitch, 
roll,  and  yaw.  A  cut  off  point  of  1  mm  in  any  direction  was 
kept  as  the  criteria  for  motion.  After  these  quality  control 
measures,  data  from  three  participants  from  the  phishing 
experiment  were discarded resulting in 22 usable datasets for 
that experiment. Lastly, all normalized images were smoothed 
using a Gaussian filter of 8mm full width half maximum. 

Statistical analyses were performed on individual data and 
group  data  using  the  General  Linear  Model  (GLM).  In  GLM 
analysis, each voxel in the brain will have a signal time-series 
for  a  given  experiment  based  on  how  that  voxel  behaves  in 
response to a specific task. The GLM formula is Y = X*β+ε, 
where Y is the fMRI signal at various time points at a single 
voxel,  X  is  several  components  (the  design  matrix  with 
different  conditions,  such  as  real,  fake,  malware)  that  can 
explain  the  observed  fMRI  signal,  β  is  the  parameter  that 
defines  the  contribution  of  each  component  of  the  design 
matrix  to  the  value  of  Y,  and ε  is  the difference  between  the 
observed  data  (Y)  and  that  predicted  by  the  model  (X*β). 
Group  analyses  were  performed  using  a  random-effects 
model. Regions of interest (ROIs) with statistically significant 
activation  were  identified  using  a  t-statistic  on  a  voxel  by 
voxel  basis.  Separate  regressors  were  created  (for  real,  fake, 
and  fixation  stimuli  in  phishing  experiment,  and  abstract, 
warning,  and  no-warning  for  malware  experiment)  by 
convolving a boxcar function with the standard hemodynamic 
response  function  as  specified  in  SPM.  Statistical  maps  were 

  7

 
Overview of various brain regions associated with our experiments 

TABLE III. ABBREVIATIONS FOR BRAIN REGIONS ACTIVATED DURING OUR 

EXPERIMENTS 

Acronym 
MPFC 
LIFG 
RIFG 
LMFG 
RMFG 
LOFC 
ROFC 
LMTG 
RMTG 
LSTG 
RSTG 
LIPL 
RIPL 
LOC 
ROC 

Brain Region 
Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
Right Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
Left Middle Frontal Gyrus 
Right Middle Frontal Gyrus 
Left Orbitofrontal Cortex 
Right Orbitofrontal Cortex 
Left Middle Temporal Gyrus 
Right Middle Temporal Gyrus 
Left Superior Temporal Gyrus 
Right Superior Temporal Gyrus 
Left Inferior Parietal Lobule 
Right Inferior Parietal Lobule 
Left Occipital Cortex 
Right Occipital Cortex 

 

(1) PHISHING DETECTION EXPERIMENT RESULTS 

In this section, we present the phishing experiment results. 
We first report the raw analysis results, and then interpret and 
discuss all of the findings. 

In  the  phishing  task,  participants  were  asked  to  make  a 
decision  as  to  whether  a  snapshot  of  a  website  presented  to 

them was real or fake. The participants could be looking at the 
website  address  or  the  symbols  or  logos  on  the  snapshot  to 
make  their  decision.  During  this  task  (in  contrast  with 
fixation),  we  found  statistically  significantly  increased  brain 
activity  in  the  bilateral  frontoparietal  network  along  with 
activation in bilateral occipital areas (p = 0.001; cluster size = 
64  mm3  determined  by  Monte  Carlo  simulations  to  be 
equivalent  to  a  family  wise  error  corrected  threshold  of  p  < 
0.05)  [21].  There  was  increased  activity  in  the  bilateral 
inferior,  middle  and  orbital  frontal  areas,  in  the  bilateral 
inferior parietal lobule, and in the bilateral occipital extending 
to ventral temporal areas. This pattern of activity was similar 
across  different  conditions:  real,  fake  or  real+fake,  all 
contrasted  with  fixation  (see  Figure  4  for  a  map  of  brain 
activity in different contrasts). 

interactions  where the consequences can be costly. Thus, our 
goal  was  to  examine  the  impact  of  impulsive  decisions  on 
phishing task performance and the neural circuitry underlying 
such  behavior.  A  regression  analysis  involving  BIS  scores 
from  participants  as  a  covariate  with  whole  brain  activation 
revealed a statistically  significant  negative relationship in the 
MPFC  (p  < 0.001;  cluster  size  =  64  mm3)  (See  Figure  6). In 
other  words,  more  impulsive  individuals  had  less  activity  in 
MPFC. 

 
Fig 5.  Contrast of “Real” and “Fake” Activation. Fake vs. Real activation 
regions include  right middle, inferior, and orbital frontal gyri (LIFG/LMFG), 
and  left  inferior  parietal  lobule  (LIPL).  Real  vs.  Fake  activation  regions 
include  left  precentral  gyrus,  right  cerebellum,  left  cingulate  gyrus,  and  the 
occipital cortex. 

 

Fig  6.  Impulsivity  vs.  MPFC  Activation  in  Malware  Warnings.    There 
exists a negative relationship between impulsivity and brain activity in medial 
prefrontal cortex (MPFC). 

(Phishing  Detection): 
Interpretation  and  Discussion 
Searching,  attention  shift,  and  decision-making  are  critical 
components  of  higher  cognitive  functions.  The  phishing  task 
in  the  present  study  involves  all  these  elements  in  helping 
participants  decide  which  website  was  real  and  which  was 
fake.  At  the  neural  level,  the  statistically  significant  activity 
we see in frontoparietal network (Figure 4) may be indicative 
of  the  involvement  of  a  top-down  control  and  attention 
modulation  system  and  a  bottom-up  control  system  in  this 
task.  The  top-down  system  consists  of  regions,  such  as  the 
intra-parietal sulcus (IPS), and superior parietal lobule (SPL), 
and  the  bottom-up  system  includes  temporoparietal  junction 

 
Fig  4.    “Fake”,  “Real”,  and  “Fake+Real”  Activation.  Activation  regions 
include  bilateral 
frontoparietal  along  with  bilateral  occipital  areas 
(LOC/ROC),  as  well  as  bilateral  inferior,  middle  and  orbital  frontal  areas 
(LIFG/RIFG;  LMFG/RMFG)  and  bilateral 
lobule 
(LIPL/RIPL), and bilateral occipital extending to ventral temporal areas. 

inferior  parietal 

identified  as 

fake 

Direct  subtraction  of  real  trials  from  fake  trials,  and  fake 
trials  from  real  trials  revealed  statistically  significant  activity 
in  several  areas  of  the  brain  that  are  critical  and  specific  to 
making  “real”  or  “fake”  judgments.  For  websites  that  the 
participants 
real), 
participants activated right middle, inferior, and orbital frontal 
gyri,  and  left  inferior  parietal  lobule  (see  Figure  5).  On  the 
other  hand,  when  real  websites  were  identified,  participants 
showed  increased  activity  in  several  regions,  such  as  the  left 
precentral  gyrus,  right  cerebellum,  left  cingulate  gyrus,  and 
the occipital cortex. 

(contrasted  with 

All  participants  of  this  study  also  completed  the  Barratt’s 
Impulsiveness  Scale  (BIS)  [1].  BIS  is  a  30  item  self-report 
instrument  designed  to  assess  the  personality/behavioral 
construct  of  impulsiveness.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  commonly 
administered self-report measure specifically designed for the 
assessment  of  impulsiveness  in  both  research  and  clinical 
settings. Impulsive responding can result in behavioral errors, 
and  such  responses  can  be  critical  in  computer  security 

  8

(TPJ) and inferior fontal gyrus (IFG) [22, 23]. Many of these 
regions  that  are  part  of  top-down  and  bottom-up  control 
showed significant activity in the phishing task in the present 
study.  Such  increased  control  may  be  critical  in  making 
important judgments about the legitimacy of a website.  

Increased activation was found in the right frontal and left 
parietal  regions  while  deciding  that  a  given  website  is  fake 
(Figure  5).  At  one  level,  this  is  another  evidence  of  a  more 
strategic  and  controlled  approach  to  a  more  difficult  task 
(identifying fake websites). These findings are consistent with 
a previous fMRI study [24], where the participants were asked 
to identify whether a series of Rembrandt paintings were real 
or  fake.  This  study  found  increased  activity  in  RMFG  while 
participants identified fake paintings. Fake websites may pose 
more challenge to the participants as they may have to spend 
more  time  thinking  about  different  attributes,  sometimes 
recalling  from  memory.  Middle  frontal,  inferior  frontal,  and 
inferior  parietal  areas  have  also  been  implicated  in  working 
memory  [25].  Identifying  real  websites  activated  precentral, 
cerebellum, cingulate and visual areas (Figure 5).  In addition 
to  their  motor  functions,  the  cerebellum  and  precentral  gyrus 
have  topographically  organized  feedforward  and  feedback 
projections [26]. This network may be mediating the decision-
making process as to whether a given website is real. 

screen  which  either  cautioned  them  about  a  malicious 
computer attack (warning condition) or a casual pop-up (non-
warning  condition)  asking  them  a  question  or  seeking 
information from them. The participants were asked to decide 
“yes”  or  “no”  before  proceeding.  Thus,  there  were  three 
experimental conditions: abstract, warning, and non-warning. 
Reading  the  news  item,  relative  to  warning  and  non-warning 
taken  together,  elicited  statistically  significant  increase  in 
brain  activity  in  several  regions  primarily  associated  with 
language 
include 
LMTG/LSTG,  LIFG,  bilateral  inferior  parietal  (IPL),  and 
bilateral occipital cortex (p < 0.001 with a cluster threshold of 
80mm3 that is equivalent to a family wise error correction of p 
< 0.05 determined by Monte Carlo simulations [21], as in the 
phishing  data  analysis).  There  was  also  some  activity  in  the 
right  inferior  frontal  (RIFG)  and  middle  temporal  (RMTG) 
regions,  perhaps  not  to  the  same  extent  as  their 
left 
hemisphere homologues. This pattern of activity was also seen 
in  the  contrasts:  Abstract  >  Non-warning  and  in  Abstract  > 
Warning (see Figure 7).   

comprehension. 

regions 

These 

task. 

from 

previous 

studies 

relationship.  Personality 

Yet  another  finding  from  the  present  study  pertains  to  a 
brain-behavior 
traits,  such  as 
impulsivity  may  prove  vital  in  the  way  an  individual 
approaches  a  cognitively  demanding 
Impulsive 
individuals  may  seek  immediate  gratification  and  may  make 
quick  decisions  without  much  thought.  Such  behavior  can 
affect  online  computer  security  behavior.  The  present  study 
found an inverse relationship between impulsivity and MPFC 
activity  during  real  or  fake  phishing  decisions  (Figure  6). 
Evidence 
suggest  MPFC’s 
executive/regulatory  function  in  that  it  mediates  competing 
and conflicting cognitive operations and scenarios [27, 28, 29, 
30,  31].  Studies  involving  animal  models  suggest  a  pivotal 
role  of  MPFC  in  impulsive  decision-making  [32].  Functional 
MRI  studies  of  delay  discounting  have  found 
inverse 
correlation  between  participants’ 
impulsive  choice  of 
decisions  and  activity  in  regions  like  MPFC  [33,  34].  Delay 
discounting  refers  to  giving  future  consequences  less  weight 
relative to more immediate consequences (e.g., [35]). In other 
words, delay discounting can be construed as the tendency to 
choose  a  smaller,  sooner  reward  over  a  larger,  later  reward. 
Similar  finding  of  inverse  correlation  in  the  present  study 
suggests the conflict and difficulty involved in making real or 
fake  decisions  during 
impulsive 
individuals. 

the  phishing 

task  for 

(2) MALWARE WARNINGS EXPERIMENT RESULTS 

In  this  section,  we  present  the  results  from  our  malware 
warnings  experiment.  Similar  to  the  phishing  detection 
presentation, we first report the raw results and then interpret 
and discuss all of our findings. 

To  recall,  in  the  malware  warnings  task,  a  section  of  a 
news item (abstract) was presented to the participants. As the 
participants read the  news item, a  message popped up on the 

  9

 
Fig  7.  Abstract  vs.  (Warning  or  Non-Warning)  Activation.  Activation 
regions  include  left  middle  and  superior  temporal  gyri  (LMTG/LSTG),  left 
inferior  frontal  gyrus  (LIFG),  bilateral  inferior  parietal  (LIPL/RIPL),  and 
bilateral occipital cortex (LOC/ROC), as well as right inferior frontal (RIFG) 
and middle temporal (RMTG) 

relative 

The  warning  and  non-warning  conditions  showed  more 
activity  compared  to  reading  the  abstracts  of  the  news  items. 
Comprehending  warning, 
to  abstract,  elicited 
statistically significant increase in activation in several regions 
of the right hemisphere, such as the RIPL, RMTG/RSTG, and 
cuneus  (see  Figure  8).  Processing  non-warning  pop-ups, 
relative to news item abstracts, also elicited similar patterns of 
activation,  albeit  with  some  differences.  There  was  bilateral 
activation in  middle/superior temporal cortex in this contrast. 
In  addition,  the  right  parietal  activation  was  relatively  more 
anterior, in the postcentral gyrus.  

 

Fig  10.  Impulsivity  vs.  Activation  in  Malware  Warnings.    There  is  a 
negative  relationship  between  impulsivity  and  brain  activity  in  medial 
prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and precuneus  

 Interpretation and Discussion (Malware Warnings):  

Language  comprehension  is  a  critical  component  in  a 
user’s  online  interactions.  In  this  study,  participants  had  to 
read  several  news  items  and  make  appropriate  responses  to 
malware  warnings  (and  non-warnings).  Reading  the  news 
items as  well as reading  warnings generated significant brain 
activity in regions such as the LIFG and LMTG/LSTG (Figure 
7). This activation pattern provides further evidence of the role 
of 
language 
comprehension (see [36, 37, 38]). The LIFG, in particular, has 
been implicated in the unification of lexical information stored 
in the temporal cortex [39]. Activation in these areas suggests 
that  the  participants  in  the  present  study  were  going  through 
the warnings to understand the conveyed message and make a 
decision. 

in  different  aspects  of 

these 

regions 

There  were  also  qualitative  differences  in  activation 
between  processing  warning  and  non-warning  pop-ups. 
Warnings generated statistically significant increase in activity 
in  language  areas  of  the  brain,  such  as  LIFG  and  LMTG 
(Figure  9).  In  addition,  there  was  statistically  significant 
activation  in  bilateral  occipital  cortices,  which  may  provide 
evidence  of  how  much  visual  attention  and  inspection 
participants  were  engaging  in  during  warnings.  On  the  other 
hand,  non-warnings,  which  usually  were  not  a  threat  did  not 
generate any extra activation when compared with the warning 
condition.  

High  impulsivity,  the  tendency  to  act  quickly  without 
considering  the  broader,  especially  future,  consequences  of 
one’s  actions,  has  been  found  to  be  associated  with  several 
psychopathological  conditions  [40,  41].  Impulsive  decisions 
can  affect  user  safety  and  security  in  a  computer  security 
interaction  (as  we  demonstrated  in  the  case  of  phishing).  We 
found  trait  impulsivity  in  our  participants,  measured  by  the 
Barratt’s Impulsivity Scale, to negatively predict brain activity 
in  MPFC  and  precuneus  while  paying  attention  to  security 
warnings  (Figure  10).  Thus,  more  impulsive  participants  had 
less  activity  in  these  regions  during  the  malware  task.  This 
finding  is  consistent  with  findings  from  several  previous 
neuroimaging studies. For example, the precuneus  was found 
to  be  negatively  correlated  with  measures  of  impulsivity  in  a 
response  inhibition  task  [42].  MPFC  grey  matter  volume  has 
also  been  found  to  be  negatively  correlated  with  impulsivity 
[43].  

 

Fig  8  (Warning  or  Non-Warning)  vs.  Abstract  Activation.  Activation 
regions  include  right  inferior  parietal  lobule  (RIPL),  right  middle/superior 
temporal  gyrus 
(RMTG/RSTG),  and  cuneus,  as  well  as  bilateral 
middle/superior  temporal  cortex,  and  right  parietal  in  the  postcentral  gyrus. 
(The  second  column  brain  images  do  not  show  any  activation;  they  are 
included for the sake of completeness) 

One  of  the  main  goals  of  this  study  was  to  examine  the 
brain  areas  that  may  mediate  how  people  approach  malware 
warnings.  The  participants  showed  significant  increase  in 
brain  activity  in  several  areas  while  processing  warnings, 
relative  to  non-warnings.  These  regions  include  LIFG  and 
LMTG,  both  primarily  associated  with  processing  language.  
There  was  also  increase  in  activity  in  regions,  such  as  the 
MPFC,  and  in  the  bilateral  occipital  cortices  (see  Figure  9). 
On  the  other  hand,  we  did  not  find  any  increase  in  brain 
activity for the non-warning condition, relative to the warning 
condition. 

 
Fig 9. Warning vs. Non-Warning Activation. Activation regions include left 
middle temporal gyrus (LMTG), left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG) as well as 
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), and bilateral occipital cortices. 

In  order  to  examine  personality  traits  and  their  impact  on 
computer  security  decisions,  as  in  the  phishing  data  analysis, 
we  used  impulsivity  scores  as  a  covariate  in  a  regression 
analysis  with  brain  activity  while  reading  security  warnings. 
This  analysis  revealed  significant  negative  relationship 
between 
in  MPFC  and 
precuneus (see Figure 10). 

impulsivity  and  brain  activity 

  10 

B.  Behavioral Data Analysis 

Phishing  Detection  Experiment:  During 
the  phishing 
experiment,  we  instructed  the  participants  to  give  their 
response  during  the  trials  by  pressing  the  buttons  using  their 
index  fingers.  Each  participant  was  asked  to  use  his/her  left 
index finger to respond that the website is fake, and the right 
index  finger  to  respond  that  the  website  is  real.  Our  E-Prime 
interface  automatically  recorded  the  response  made  by  the 
participants and the corresponding response time.   

Based  on  this  recorded  data,  we  collected  statistics  for 
participant  accuracy  (acc)  and  response  time  (time)  for 
different types of trials, as summarized in Table IV. Accuracy 
is  defined  as  the  fraction  of  times  a  particular  trial  was 
correctly identified out of the total number of occurrences for 
that trial. 

We  can  observe  that,  on  an  average  across  all  trials,  the 
participants  spent  3.35  seconds  to  make  a  decision  but  the 
accuracy  was  only  around  60%,  i.e.,  40%  of  the  times,  they 
misidentified  a  fake  website  as  a  real  website  and  a  real 
website as a fake website. This accuracy is only slightly better 
than making a random guess. Prior work by Dhamija et al. [8] 
also  reported  very  similar  results  with  their  computer-based 
lab  study.  As  mentioned  in  Section  V.A,  our  neuroimaging 
data  indicated  strong  brain  activation  in  regions  associated 
with  decision  making  during  both  real  and  fake  judgment, 
particularly more during fake judgment. Although it is unclear 
why fake trials would show increased brain activity in RMFG 
but  poor  accuracy,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  participants 
were putting more effort to identify fake websites but still not 
able to come up with the correct answers.  

TABLE IV:  STATISTICS FOR ACCURACY AND RESPONSE TIME – PHISHING 

Trials 

Real 

Fake 

Easy Fake 

Difficult Fake 

All 

EXPERIMENT 
µacc    (σacc) 
76.68% 
(18.84%) 
46.48% 
(20.58%) 
56.57% 
(23.29%) 
33.98% 
(23.61%) 
60.42% 
(13.99%) 

µtime   (σtime) 
3323 ms      
(1066 ms) 
3276 ms        
(584 ms) 
3077 ms       
(625 ms) 
3538 ms 
(645 ms) 
3347 ms 
(654 ms) 

 

The average accuracy of identifying real websites was the 
highest  (about  77%)  and  much  higher  than  the  average 
accuracy of identifying fake websites (about 46%). Similar to 
the findings of our neural imaging data, this suggests that real 
website  detection  is  an  easier  task  compared  to  fake  website 
detection.  Intuitively,  the  accuracies  for  easy  fake  trials  were 
higher than for difficult trials (57% vs. 39%). 

The  average  response  time  for  all  types  of  trials  was 
similar,  over  3  s.  The  average  reaction  time  for  identifying 
easy fake website was the lowest and for identifying  difficult 
fake  website  was  the  highest.  We  also  found  a  statistically 
significant difference between the response time of easy fake 
and  difficult  fake  trials  (paired  t-test;  p-value  =  0.006;  CI  = 

  11 

95%). Easy fake websites had differences easier to distinguish 
than  the  difficult  fake  websites,  so  participants  might  have 
noticed  them  pretty  early  when  making  decision.  Moreover, 
the average time spent on deciding the difficult fake websites 
was  comparatively  more  than  the  time  spent  for  other  trials, 
but  still  the  accuracy  rate  for  difficult  fake  was  the  lowest 
among  all  trials.  The  participants  may  have  spent  more  time 
on  the  difficult  fake  trials  but  still  could  not  detect  them  as 
fake due to the level of difficulty associated with these trials. 
However,  we did not find  significant correlation between the 
response time and accuracy for any of the trials. 

Malware  Warnings  Experiment:  The  data  acquisition 
approach  for  the  malware  experiment  was  similar  to  that  for 
the  phishing  experiment.  The  participant  pressed  a  button 
using his or her left index finger to indicate “No” and a button 
using  his  or  her  right  index  finger  to  input  “Yes.”  For  the 
warnings conditions, pressing “No” was equivalent to heeding 
the  warning  and  “Yes”  was  equivalent  to  ignoring  the 
warning. 

TABLE V: STATISTICS FOR ACCURACY AND RESPONSE TIME – MALWARE 

Conditions 

Non-Warnings 

Warnings 

All 

 

EXPERIMENT 
µacc       (σacc) 
67.49 % 
(26.57%) 
88.71%  
(28.62%) 
81.05%  
(19.59%) 

µtime   (σtime) 
4228 ms           
(664 ms) 
3715 ms          
(1141 ms) 
4022 ms            
(588 ms) 

Similar to the phishing experiment, we collected statistics 
for  subjects’  accuracy  (acc)  and  response  time  (time)  for  the 
different  conditions,  as  summarized  in  Table  V.  Accuracy  is 
defined as the fraction of times a participant pressed “No” for 
a particular condition out of the total number of occurrences of 
that condition. 

An important observation is that the accuracy for heeding 
the  warnings  was  quite  high  (about  89%),  which  means  that 
participants paid attention to these warnings and chose not to 
“click-through”  most  times.  This  result  is  in  line  with  the 
results  from  a  recent  large-scale  field  study  of  Akhawe  and 
Felt  [11].  It  is  also  validated  by  the  high  brain  activation  in 
brain  regions  associated  with  problem  solving  and  decision 
making as shown by our neuroimaging analysis (Section V.A). 

We  can  also  see  that  participants  spent  shorter  amount  of 
time reacting to  warnings than non-warnings. This difference 
was  also  found  to  be  statistically  significant  (paired  t-test;  p-
value  =  0.04;  CI  =  95%).  Also,  the  probability  of  overriding 
the pop-up was less for warnings than non-warnings. A similar 
effect was observed via our neural data analysis. Overall, this 
indicates  that  the  content  of  warnings  might  have  been 
prominent enough to raise suspicion in the minds of the users, 
resulting in their pressing "No" more quickly. 

VI.  CROSS-EXPERIMENT ANALYSIS 

So  far,  we  have  presented  the  findings  drawn  from  the 
independent analysis of different experiments. One  important 

feature of our study design, involving multiple experiments in 
the  same scanning  session,  was to  facilitate  measuring  users’ 
performance  across  these  experiments.  In  this  section,  we 
present the results from such a cross-experiment analysis. 

A.  Phishing vs. Phishing Control 

task 

the  phishing 

In  order  to  examine  the  overlapping  and  unique  activity 
associated with the phishing task and a visual control task, we 
compared  the  phishing  with  the  phishing  control  experiment. 
While 
involved  participants  making 
judgments  about  whether  the  websites  were  “real”  or  “fake”, 
the  phishing  control  task  presented  the  same  websites  as  the 
stimuli, but the participants were told to relax and view them 
without  engaging  in  any  active  tasks.  Both  tasks  elicited 
significantly increased activity in the visual cortex, perhaps in 
line  with  the  visual  demands  of  the  stimuli.  However,  the 
phishing 
task  showed  significantly  greater  and  unique 
activation  in  various  regions,  such  as  RMFG  and  bilateral 
insula  (see  Figure  11),  a  pattern  not  seen  in  the  phishing 
control experiment. 

task  explicitly  examined  subjects’  ability 

phishing 
to 
distinguish  between  a  “real”  and  a  “fake”  website.  At  the 
neural  level,  we  examined  the  correlation  between  these  two 
tasks in terms of the brain activity in two regions, LMFG and 
RMFG, which are associated with decision-making. We found 
a  significant  positive  correlation  in  both  LMFG  and  RMFG 
activity,  particularly  in  the  RMFG  region  (see  Figures  12(a) 
and 12(b)). 

These  results  suggest  that  both  phishing  detection  and 
malware warnings involve similar, higher level cognitive and 
neural  processes.  We  may  also  infer  that  participants’ 
behavior  in  these  two  distinct  yet  related  tasks  may  be  well-
aligned in that one’s ability to heed malware warnings may be 
associated  with  his/her  decisions  about  the  legitimacy  of  a 
website  and  vice  versa.    Thus,  the  quality  of  online  security 
behavior may be determined by users’ cognitive ability and by 
the  selective  activation  of  specific  brain  areas  in  appropriate 
contexts.  

The  anterior  insula  has  been  implicated  in  a  variety  of 
functions,  such  as  affective  and  cognitive 
judgments. 
Activation  in  anterior  insula,  along  with  MFG,  has  been 
associated  with  making  choices  [44,  45].  The  middle  frontal 
gyrus  also  has  been  found  to  be  playing  a  critical  role  in 
cognitive control especially in selecting an appropriate choice 
of  action  [46].    The  activation  of  these  important  decision-
making  regions  of  the  brain  in  the  phishing  experiment  (vs. 
the  control  experiment)  demonstrated  that  the  participants 
were  conscientiously  making  an  effort  as  to  differentiate 
“fake” websites from “real” websites. 

Fig 12 (a). Correlation in Phishing and Malware in LMFG Activation 

 

Fig  11.  Phishing  vs.  Phishing  Control  Activation.  Both  tasks  show 
significant  activity  in  the  visual  cortex.  Phishing  shows  greater  and  unique 
activation in the right middle frontal gyrus (RMFG) and bilateral insula. (The 
top right corner brain image only shows little activation; it is included for the 
sake of completeness). 

B.  Phishing vs. Malware 

Both  phishing  and  malware  tasks  in  our  study  involved 
decision-making, perhaps in slightly different ways. While the 
malware 
tested  whether  participants  were  paying 
attention to security  warnings  while reading a news item, the 

task 

 

Fig 12 (b): Correlation in Phishing and Malware in RMFG Activation 

VII.  DISCUSSION: STUDY INSIGHTS AND IMPLICATIONS  

 

In this section, we summarize and further discuss the main 
findings from our study.  The neural signatures (activation in 
unique brain regions) associated with, and across, the phishing 
detection  and  malware  warnings  tasks  are  summarized  in 
Table VI. 

Distinguishing between  fake  and real  websites underlying 
the phishing task produced increased activation in many areas 
of the brain associated with decision making, problem solving, 
attention  and  visual  search.  This  means  that  the  participants 
were  undergoing  significant  effort  in  making  the  “fake”  or 

  12 

“real”  decisions.  Our  neuroimaging  results  also  show  extra 
activation  in  decision-making  areas  such  as  RMFG  while 
identifying  a  fake  website  compared  to  identifying  a  real 
website,  perhaps 
task  difficulty. 
Moreover, the comparison between the phishing and phishing 
control  tasks  clearly  highlighted  the  decision-making  aspect 
associated  with  the  former  (as  opposed  to  just  the  visual 
demands associated with both of them).  

reflecting 

increased 

While our neuroimaging data showed that users exhibited 
significant brain activation during the phishing detection task, 
their  accuracy  in  this  task,  as  determined  by  the  behavioral 
data, was only slightly better than making a random guess (in 
line with a prior lab study [10]).  This suggests that although 
the eventual decision made by the participants to differentiate 
between fake and real websites may be far from accurate, they 
certainly  were  putting  a  considerable  effort  in  making  this 
decision  as  reflected  by  their  brain  activity  in  regions 
correlated with higher order cognitive processing. Perhaps this 
was  because  many  of  the  participants  did  not  know  what 
markers  to  look  for  (e.g.,  URL  or  logo)  on  the  sites  to  make 
their  decisions.  We  note  that  a  large  fraction  of  our 
participants  belonged  to  a  non-technical  (non-computer) 
background. Overall, these findings further justify the need for 
specialized  education  and  training  for  every  day  users 
focusing on phishing in particular (such as the efforts of [47, 
48]) and security in general (such as [49, 50]). These training 
and  awareness  programs  may  help  improve  users’  phishing 
detection  performance  and  reduce  the  chances  of  their 
susceptibility  to  other  attacks.  At  the  same  time,  the  findings 
also  motivate  the  need  for  continued  research  on  designing 
phishing resistant software solutions and user interfaces.  

in  contrast 

in  regions  primarily  associated  with 

The  malware  warnings  task  triggered  significant  brain 
activity 
language 
comprehension  and  reading.  Importantly,  the  actual  malware 
to  casual  pop-ups,  generated 
warnings, 
significantly  more  activation 
in  brain  areas  governing 
language  comprehension  as  well  as  visual  attention  and 
inspection.  This  suggests  that  the  participants  were  reading 
through  the  warnings  carefully  to  understand  the  message 
conveyed by the warnings and making an attempt to take  an 
appropriate  decision.  Indeed,  this  was  validated  via  our 
behavioral  data  which  showed 
that  participants  heeded 
warnings about 90% of the times (also in line with the recent 
large-scale field study of [11]). We therefore believe that our 
study provides a neurological basis as to the users’ capability 
to process and heed malware  warnings, further validating the 
results  of  [11].  It  should  be  noted  that  since  our  security 
warnings  were  quite  simplified,  our 
to 
underestimate  users’  performance  when  faced  with  malware 
warnings,  which  could  be  improved  with  better  warnings 
(such  as  those  employed  by  modern  browsers  and  variants 
thereof [11]). 

results  seem 

Another  key  component  of  our  study  was  to  asses  users’ 
performance  in  user-centered  security  tasks  based  on  their 
personality  traits.  Specifically,  we  studied  the  effect  of 
impulsivity  measured  via  a  simple  questionnaire.  We  found 
that,  in  both  phishing  detection  and  malware  warnings  tasks, 
impulsive 
less  brain 
activation in regions governing decision-making and problem 

significantly 

individuals 

showed 

  13 

solving.  This  implies  that  impulsive  behavior  might  be 
counter-productive 
to  phishing  detection  and  malware 
warnings task performance. A long-term impact of this finding 
can be in developing targeted security training programs.  For 
example,  an  organization  may  concentrate  their  security 
training  efforts  on  employees  who  are  highly  impulsive,  as 
determined  by  their  scores  in  the  impulsivity  questionnaire 
[1]. Similarly, school authorities  may  focus their online child 
safety efforts on children with high trait impulsivity.  

A unique advantage of our study was that it allowed for a 
direct  comparison  between 
the  phishing  detection  and 
malware  warnings tasks. In this respect,  we found significant 
correlation  in  participants’  brain  activity  governing  decision-
making  regions  (bilateral  middle  frontal  gyri).  This  suggests 
that  both  tasks  involve,  at  a  higher  level,  some  similar 
cognitive  processes  and  that  users’  performance  in  the  two 
tasks might be correlated with each other.  Note that, although 
language  comprehension  is  unique  to  the  malware  task,  both 
tasks involved a crucial decision making aspect. Broadly, this 
seems  to  indicate  that  the  cognitive  mechanisms  underlying 
these  security  tasks  are  related,  which  may  translate  into 
similarity in users’ performance in the two tasks.  

Although  fMRI  scans  are  expensive,  we  believe  that  our 
methodology  could  also  serve  the  purpose  of  security 
screening of individuals involved in high-security operations, 
such as in the national defense sector. 
 

VIII.  CONCLUSIONS AND  FUTURE WORK 

users’ 

towards 

capability 

perspective 

In this paper, we presented an fMRI study to bring insights 
into  user-centered  security,  specifically  focusing  on  phishing 
detection, and malware warnings. Our results provide a largely 
positive 
and 
performance  vis-à-vis  these  crucial  security  tasks.  We  found 
that users show significant brain activity in key regions known 
to  govern  decision-making,  attention,  and  problem-solving 
ability  (phishing  and  malware  warnings)  as  well  as  language 
comprehension and reading (malware warnings). This level of 
activation  indicates  that  users  were  actively  engaged  in  these 
tasks, and were not ignoring or bypassing them (as many prior 
lab studies seem to have concluded [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]). In 
the  case  of  the  malware  warnings  task,  brain  activity  and 
behavioral performance (accuracy) were complementing each 
other validating that users heed malware warnings with a high 
likelihood (as also shown by a recent field study [11]). For the 
phishing  task,  however,  task  performance  was  poor  despite 
significant  brain  activity  associated  with  decision  making. 
This divergent result demands future investigation. It could be 
attributed  to  users’  lack  of  knowledge  as  to  the  markers  for 
“fake”  vs.  “real”  decisions  (e.g.,  URLs),  which  may  be 
overcome  by  user  education  and 
training.  We  also 
demonstrated that individuals with higher impulsive traits may 
not  utilize  their  neural  resources  as  efficiently  as  non-
impulsive individuals, and may result in poorer cognitive and 
behavioral  outcomes.  This  suggests  it  would  be  valuable  to 
study whether individual trait characteristics should factor into 
user-center  security  design.  Finally,  we  discovered  a  high 
degree  of  correlation  in  brain  activity  (with  respect  to 
decision-making  regions)  across  phishing  detection  and 

malware  warnings tasks. This correlation suggests that users’ 
behavior in one task may be predicted by their behavior in the 
other task.  

We see a clear path-forward for subsequent research using 
neuroimaging  techniques  (e.g.,  fMRI,  EEG  or  fNIRS)  to 
inform  the  design  of  user-centered  security  systems.  In  the 
long-run, such studies may provide a neural signature for poor 

and good security decisions which can be used for predicting 
as well as correcting users' security behavior. Future research 
may  conduct  subsequent  evaluation  with  diverse  participant 
samples,    study  the  effect  of  warning  fatigue  or  habituation, 
consider  user-centered  security  domains  other  than  phishing 
detection and malware warnings (e.g., password memorization 
and  recall),    and  evaluate  the  effect  of  security  training  and 
education on users’ performance.  

TABLE VI:  NEURAL SIGNATURES OF PHISHING, MALWARE WARNINGS, PHISHING VS.PHISHING CONTROL, AND PHISHING VS. MALWARE WARNINGS 

Task 

Condition 

Fake; Real; Fake+Real  
(Figure 4) 

Fake vs. Real  
(Figure 5) 

Activation Regions                                       
(Neural Signatures) 
LOC & ROC, LIFG/RIFG, LIPL/RIPL 
Bilateral Occipital  extending to Ventral 
Temporal areas 
RIFG/RMFG, LIPL 

 

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
D
g
n

 

i

h
s
i

h
P

i

 
s
g
n
n
r
a
W

 
e
r
a
w
l
a
M

e
m
i
r
e
p
x
E

-
s
s
o
r
C

Real vs. Fake  
(Figure 5 ) 
Abstract vs. Warning;  Abstract vs. 
Non-Warning; Abstract vs. 
Warning+Non-Warning  (Figure 7) 
Warning or Non-Warning vs. 
Abstract (Figure 8) 
Warning vs. Non-Warning  
(Figure 9) 

Left Precentral Gyrus, Right Cerebellum  
Left Cingulate Gyrus, Occipital Cortex 
LMTG , LSTG ,LIFG, LIPL/RIPL, 
LOC/ROC, RIFG , RMTG 

Cuneus, Right Middle/Superior Temporal 
Cortex, RIPL 
LMTG, LIFG, MPFC, LOC/ROC 

Phishing vs. Phishing Control 
(Figure 11) 

 
t
n

Phishing vs. Malware 
(Figure 12) 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Visual Cortex (both tasks) 
RMFG (phishing) 
Bilateral Insula (phishing) 
LMFG 
RMFG 

Activation Association 

Visual processing, search, 
attention shift, and decision-
making 
Search, attention shift, and 
decision-making 
(fake decisions are harder) 
Attention, decision-making, 
and visual processing 
Language comprehension, 
visual processing, reading 

Language comprehension, 
visual attention 
Language comprehension,  
visual attention and inspection 
(warnings show more activity 
than non-warnings) 
Visual processing (both  tasks) 
search, attention shift, and 
decision-making (phishing) 
Decision-making, visual 
attention 

works. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '06), 581-590, 2006. 

M.Wolfe,  and  Todd  S.  Horowitz.  Why  is  visual  search  superior  in 
autism  spectrum  disorder?  Developmental  Science,  12(6):1083–1096, 
2009. 

Thomas.  Spatial  and  temporal  resolution  of  functional  magnetic 
resonance  imaging.  Biochemistry  and  cell  biology,  76(2-3):560–571, 
1998. 

[6]  R.S.  Menon,  J.S.  Gati,  B.G.  Goodyear,  D.C.  Luknowsky,  and  C.G. 
[7]  Robert  M.  Joseph,  Brandon  Keehn,  Christine  Connolly,  Jeremy 
[8]  Rachna  Dhamija,  J.  D.  Tygar,  and  Marti  Hearst.  2006.  Why  phishing 
[9]  Lorrie Faith Cranor. A framework for reasoning about the human in the 
[10]  Rachna Dhamija, J. D. Tygar, and Marti Hearst. Why phishing works. In 
[11]  Devdatta  Akhawe,  and  Adrienne  Porter  Felt.  Alice  inWarningland:  A 
[12]  Min Wu, Robert C. Miller, and Simson L. Garfinkel. 2006. Do security 
[13]  Joshua  Sunshine,  Serge  Egelman,  Hazim  Almuhimedi,  Neha  Atri,  and 

loop. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Usability, Psychology, and 
Security, UPSEC’08, pages 1:1–1:15, 2008. 

CHI  '06:  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
computing systems, pages 581{590, 2006. 

toolbars  actually  prevent  phishing  attacks?.  In  Proceedings  of  the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '06) 

SecurityWarning 

Browser 

Large-Scale 
Effectiveness.Usenix Security, 2013. 

Study 

Field 

of 

Lorrie  Faith Cranor.  Crying  wolf:  An  empirical  study  of  ssl  warning  e 
ectiveness. usenix security. In Usenix Security Symposium, 2009. 

their  constructive 

We thank N. Asokan, Cali Fidopiastis, Lauren Libero, Ivan 
Martinovic,  Paul  Van  Oorschot,  and  John  Sloan  for  their 
feedback  on  a  previous  draft  version  of  this  paper,  and  Rishi 
Deshpande  for  initial  help  with  the  experimental  set-up.  We 
also  thank  David  Wagner  (our  shepherd)  and  NDSS’14 
anonymous  reviewers  for 
input  and 
guidance.   

(Eds.),  Violence  and  Mental  Disorder: 
and  H.  J.  Steadman 
Developments  in  Risk  Assessment  (pp.  61-79).   University  of  Chicago 
Press, Chicago, IL. 

[1]  Barratt,  E.S.   (1994).  Impulsiveness  and  Aggression.   In  Monahan,  J. 
[2]  An  introduction  to  E-Prime,  Laurence  Richard,  Miami  University, 
[3]  http://step.psy.cmu.edu/materials/manuals/users.pdf 
[4] 
[5]  S. Ogawa, TM Lee, AR Kay, and DW Tank. Brain magnetic resonance 

 Robert  M.  Joseph,  Brandon  Keehn,  Christine  Connolly,  Jeremy  M. 
Wolfe,  and  Todd  S.  Horowitz.Why  is  visual  search  superior  in  autism 
spectrum disorder? Developmental Science, 12(6):1083–1096, 2009. 

Dominic Charbonneau, Université de Montréal, Tutorials in Quantitative 
Methods for Psychology 2009, vol 5(2), p. 68-76.  

REFERENCES 

imaging with contrast dependent on blood oxygenation. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 87(24):9868, 1990. 

  14 

http:// homepage.usask.ca/~ges125/fMRI/AFNIdoc/AlphaSim.pdf 

Top-down  and  bottom-up  attentional  control,  Frontiers  in  Integrative 
Neuroscience, Volume 6, July 2012 , ISSN 1662-5145. 

Helen  Nissenbaum.  2002.  Users'  conceptions  of  web  security:  a 
comparative study. In CHI '02 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI EA '02). 

M.C.  Vendemia  (2012)  Suspicious  Minds:  Exploring  Neural  Processes 
During  Exposure  to  Deceptive  Advertising.  Journal  of  Marketing 
Research: June 2012, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 361-372. 

Ros  and  Dawn  Song.  On  the  Feasibility  of  Side−Channel  Attacks  with 
Brain−Computer  Interfaces.  In  21st  USENIX  Security  Symposium. 
USENIX Association. August, 2012. 

Lincoln.  Neuroscience  Meets  Cryptography:  Designing  Crypto 
Primitives  Secure  Against  Rubber  Hose  Attacks.  In  21st  USENIX 
Security Symposium. USENIX Association. August, 2012. 

Komanduri,  "Bridging  the  Gap  in  Computer  Security  Warnings:  A 
Mental  Model  Approach,"  IEEE  Security  &  Privacy,  vol.  9,  no.  2,  pp. 
18-26, March/April, 2011. 

been  warned:  an  empirical  study  of  the  effectiveness  of  web  browser 
phishing  warnings.  In  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '08). 

[14]  Stuart  E.  Schechter,  Rachna  Dhamija,  Andy  Ozment,  and  Ian  Fischer. 
The emperor's new securityindicators. In  IEEE Symposium on Security 
and Privacy, 2007. 
[15]  Batya  Friedman,  David  Hurley,  Daniel  C.  Howe,  Edward  Felten,  and 
[16]  Serge  Egelman,  Lorrie  Faith  Cranor,  and  Jason  Hong.  2008.  You've 
[17]  Cristian  Bravo-Lillo,  Lorrie  Faith  Cranor,  Julie  Downs,  Saranga 
[18]  Adam  W.  Craig,  Yuliya  Komarova  Loureiro,  Stacy  Wood,  Jennifer 
[19]  Hristo  Bojinov.  Daniel  Sanchez,  Paul  Reber,  Dan  Boneh,  Patrick 
[20]  Ivan  Martinovic‚  Doug  Davies‚  Mario  Frank‚  Daniele  Perito‚  Tomas 
[21]  Ward, B.D. (2000). Simultaneous inference for fMRI data. Available at: 
[22]  Shomstein,Sarah,  Cognitive  Functions  of  the  Posterior  Parietal  Cortex: 
[23]  DiQuattro,  N.  E.,  Geng,  J.J.,Contextual  knowledge  configures 
[24]  Huang  Mengfei,  Bridge  Holly,  Kemp  Martin  J,  Parker  Andrew  J, 
[25]  Juliana  V.  Baldo,  Nina  F.  Dronkers,  The  Role  of  Inferior  Parietal  and 
[26]  Nigel Blackwood, Dominic ffytche, Andrew Simmons, Richard Bentall, 
[27]  Buckner, Randy L., and Daniel C. Carroll, Self-projection and the brain, 
[28]  Burgess  GM,  Mullaney  I,  McNeill  M,  Dunn  PM,  Rang  HP.  Second 
[29]  Gallagher,  HL  and  Frith,  CD  (2003)  Functional  imaging  of  ‘theory  of 
[30]  Gilbert  DL,  Wang  Z,  Sallee  FR,  Ridel  KR,  Merhar  S,  Zhang  J,  et  al. 
[31]  Ramnani,  Narender.,  owen,Adrian  M.,  Anterior  prefrontal  cortex: 
[32]  Loos  M,  Pattij  T,  Janssen  MC,  Counotte  DS,  Schoffelmeer  AN,  Smit 
[33]  Luhmann,  J.  G.,Curtis,  D.  W.,Schroeder,  P.,McCauley,  J.,Lin,  R. 

AB,  Spijker  S,  van  Gaalen  MM,  Dopamine  receptor  D1/D5  gene 
expression  in  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex  predicts  impulsive  choice  in 
rats, Cerebral cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), Volume 20, Issue 5, May 
2010, Pages 1064-1070. 

Human cortical activity evoked by the assignment of authenticity when 
viewing  works  of  art,  Frontiers  in  Human  Neuroscience,  Volume  5, 
2011, Number 00134, ISSN 1662-5161. 

insights  into  function  from  anatomy  and  neuroimaging,  Nat  Rev 
Neurosci, Volume 5, Issue 3, march 2004, Pages 184-194, ISSN 1471-
003X. 

Robin  Murray,  Robert  Howard,  The  cerebellum  and  decision  making 
under uncertainty, Cognitive Brain Research, Volume 20, Issue 1, June 
2004, Pages 46-53, ISSN 0926-6410. 

attentional  control  networks,  The  Journal  of  neuroscience  :  the  official 
journal of the Society for Neuroscience, Volume 31, Issue 49, December 
2011, Pages 18026-1803. 

Inferior Frontal Cortex in Working Memory, Neuropsychology, Volume 
20, Issue 5, 2006, Pages 529-538. 

Dopamine transporter genotype influences the physiological response to 
medication in ADHD. Brain.Volume 129, Issue 8, 2006, 2038–2046. 

messengers  involved  in  the  mechanism  of  action  of  bradykinin  in 
sensory neurons in culture. J Neurosci. 1989;9:3314–3325. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences Volume 11 Issue 2, 2007, Pages 49-57. 

mind’. Trends Cogn Sci 7:77–83. 

P.,Larson,  D.  E.,Bale,  S.  D.,Sauvaud,  J.  A.,Aoustin,  C.,Mewaldt,  R. 

  15 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 78–84, 2002. 

Cognitive Sciences, 9, 416-423, 2005. 

neuroimaging. Journal of Anatomy, 197, 335–359, 2000. 

understanding  discounting.  Journal  of  Economic  Psychology,  27,  667-
680, 2006. 

understanding  the  cortical  organization  of  semantic processing,  Annual 
Review of Neuroscience, Volume 25, 2002, Pages 151-188. 

impulsivity  and  response  inhibition  in  antisocial  personality  disorder. 
Journal of Psychiatry Research, 43:1057–1063, 2009. 

GABA agonists at synaptic- and extrasynaptic-type GABAA receptors, 
The Journal of Physiology, Volume 588, 2010, Pages 1251-1268. 

psychopathology in adulthood: dimensional-spectrum conceptualization 
and  its  implications  for  DSM-V.  Journal  of    Abnormal  Psychology, 
114:537–550, 2005. 

correlates of intertemporal decision-making: contributions of subjective 
value,  stimulus  type,  and  trait  impulsivity,  Human  brain  mapping, 
Volume 32, Issue 10, October 2011, Pages 1637-1648. 

A.,Cummings,  A.  C.,Stone,  E.  C.,Davis,  A.  J.,Cook,  W.  R.,Kecman, 
B.,Wiedenbeck,  M.  E.,Rosenvinge,  T.,Acuna,  M.  H.,Reichenthal,  L. 
S.,Shuman,  S.,Wortman,  K.  A.,Reames,  D.  V.,Mueller-Mellin, 
R.,Kunow,  H.,Mason,  G.  M.,Walpole,  P.,Korth,  A.,Sanderson,  T. 
R.,Russell, C. T.,Gosling, J. T., STEREO IMPACT Investigation Goals, 
Measurements,  and  Data  Products  Overview,  Space  Science  Reviews, 
Volume 136, Issue 1-4, April 2008, Pages 117-184. 

[34]  Sripada,  C.  S.,  Gonzalez,  R.,  Phan,  K.  L.,  Liberzon,  I.,  The  neural 
[35]  Frederick,  S.  Valuing  future  life  and  future  lives:  A  framework  for 
[36]  Price,  C.J.  The  anatomy  of  language:  contributions  from  functional 
[37]  Bookheimer,  S.,  Functional  MRI  of  language:  New  approaches  to 
[38]  Friederici, A.D., Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. 
[39]  Hagoort, P. On Broca, brain, and binding: a new framework. Trends in 
[40]  Krueger  RF,  Markon  KE,  Patrick  CJ,  Iacono  WG.  Externalizing 
[41]  Swann  AC,  Lijffijt  M,  Lane  SD,  Steinberg  JL,  Moeller  FG.  .  Trait 
[42]  Mortensen  M,  Ebert  B,  Wafford  K  &  Smart  TG,  Distinct  activities  of 
[43]  Moreno-López  L,  Catena  A,  Fernández-Serrano  MJ,  Delgado-Rico  E, 
[44]  Ernst, M. & Paulus, M.P. Neurobiology of decision making: a selective 
[45]  Sanfey, A.G., Rilling, J.K., Aronson, J.A., Nystrom, L.E. & Cohen, J.D. 
[46]  Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex 
[47]  Ponnurangam  Kumaraguru,  Steve  Sheng,  Alessandro  Acquisti,  Lorrie 
[48]  Steve  Sheng,  Bryant  Magnien,  Ponnurangam  Kumaraguru,  Alessandro 
[49]  Sukamol  Srikwan  and  Markus  Jakobsson.  Using  cartoons  to  teach 
[50]  Alain  Forget,  Sonia  Chiasson,  and  Robert  Biddle.  Lessons  from  brain 
[51]  Rosen BR, Buckner RL, Dale AM. Event-related functional MRI: past, 
[52]  Julie  Thorpe,  P.  C.  van  Oorschot,  and  Anil  Somayaji.  Pass-thoughts: 
[53]  John Chuang, Hamilton Nguyen, Charles Wang, and Benjamin Johnson. 
[54]  Oldfield,  R.C.  The  assessment  and  analysis  of  handedness:  The 

Acquisti, Lorrie Faith Cranor, Jason Hong, and Elizabeth Nunge. Anti-
phishing  phil:  the  design and  evaluation  of  a  game  that  teaches people 
not to fall for phish. In SOUPS '07: Proceedings of the 3rd symposium 
on Usable privacy and security, pages 88{99, 2007. 

Stamatakis  EA,  Pérez-García  M,  Verdejo-García  A.  (2012).  Trait 
impulsivity  and prefrontal  gray  matter  reductions in  cocaine  dependent 
individuals. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2012 Oct 1;125 (3):208-14. 

Faith  Cranor,  and  Jason  Hong.  Teaching  johnny  not  to  fall  for  phish. 
ACM Trans. Internet Technol., 10(2):1{31, 2010. 

The neural basis of economic decision-making in the Ultimatum Game. 
Science, 300, 1755–1758, 2003. 

age on password memorability (poster). In Future Play '08: Proceedings 
of the 2008 Conference on Future Play, pages 262{263, 2008. 

I Think, Therefore I Am: Usability and Security of Authentication Using 
Brainwaves. In Workshop on Usable Security (USEC), 2013. 

review  from  a  neurocognitive  and  clinical  perspective.  Biological 
Psychiatry, 58, 597–604, 2005. 

authenticating  with  our  minds.  In  the  workshop  on  New  security 
paradigms (NSPW '05), 2005.  

present, and future. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:773– 780, 1998. 

function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167-202, 2001. 

internet security. Cryptologia, 32(2):137{154, 2008. 

Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9, 97-113, 1971. 

[55]  Desmond, J.E., Glover, G.H. Estimating sample size in functional MRI 
[56]  Murphy, K., & Garavan, H. An Empirical Investigation into the number 

(fMRI)  neuroimaging  studies:  statistical  power  analyses.  Journal  of 
Neuroscience Methods, 118, 115–128, 2002. 

of  subjects  required  for  an  event-related  fMRI  study.  Neuroimage,  22, 
879-885, 2004. 
 

 

[57]  Cox,  R.W.  AFNI:  software  for  analysis  and  visualization  of  functional 

magnetic resonance neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical Research, 
29, 162–73,1996. 

 

  16 

