Unique Ring Signatures: A Practical

Construction

Matthew Franklin and Haibin Zhang

Dept. of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA

{franklin,hbzhang}@cs.ucdavis.edu

Abstract. We propose unique ring signatures that simplify and capture
the spirit of linkable ring signatures. We use new techniques to provide
an instantiation which can be tightly related to the DDH problem in the
random oracle model, leading to the most eﬃcient linkable/unique ring
signature.

Keywords: anonymity, authentication, e-voting system, provable secu-
rity, ring signature, tight reduction, unique signature, veriﬁable random
function.

1

Introduction

Ring signatures [23] are very useful tools for many privacy-preserving applica-
tions. However, they are not adequate in settings where some degree of priva-
cy for users must be balanced against limited access. For example, a service
provider might have the list of public keys that correspond to all users that
have purchased a single access to some conﬁdential service for that day (re-
quiring anonymous authentication). For this kind of application, a number of
restricted-use ring signatures are proposed. Notable examples include linkable
ring signatures [1, 7, 19, 20, 25, 26] and traceable ring signatures [13, 14].

Linkable ring signature asks that if a user signs any two messages (same or
diﬀerent) with respect to the same ring, then an eﬃcient public procedure can
verify that the signer was the same (although the user’s identity is not revealed).
Traceable ring signature is a ring signature scheme where each message is
signed not only with respect to a list of ring members, but also with respect to
an issue (e.g., identifying label of a speciﬁc election or survey). If a user signs
any two diﬀerent messages with respect to the same list of ring members and
the same issue label, then the user’s identity is revealed by an eﬃcient public
procedure. If a user signs the same message twice with respect to the same list
of ring members and the same issue label, then the two signed messages can be
determined to have come from the same signer by an eﬃcient public procedure
(although the signer’s identity remains concealed).

Both linkable ring signatures and traceable ring signatures admit interesting
applications such as various e-voting systems and e-token systems, and so on.
Notably, the e-voting schemes directly from linkable or traceable ring signatures

2

Matthew Franklin and Haibin Zhang

do not need any central authorities, a unique and desirable property in sharp
contrast to all the schemes from other methods.
Unique ring signatures. We deﬁne unique ring signatures that capture the
essence of linkable ring signatures and traceable ring signatures without identity
revelation. We may say a ring signature scheme unique if whenever a signer
produces two diﬀerent ring signatures of the same message with respect to the
same ring, such that both will pass the veriﬁcation procedure, then these two
ring signatures will always have a large common component (hereinafter unique
identiﬁer ). For all the applications introduced in this paper, we further need a
non-colliding property for a unique ring signature. Call a unique ring signature
non-colliding if two diﬀerent signers of the same message, almost never produce
ring signatures with the same unique identiﬁer.
Our contributions. We provide an eﬃcient instantiation of unique ring sig-
nature in the random oracle model (ROM). Security of the scheme can be tightly
reduced to the DDH problem (where, by “tight,” it means that the success
probability of some adversary in some time is roughly equal to the probability
of solving some hard problem within almost the same period of time). Despite
the similarities with the linkable ring signature due to Liu, Wei, and Wong [19],
our construction employs a proof technique fundamentally diﬀerent from the
Cramer-Damg˚ard-Schoemaker (CDS) type of ring signatures [8, 17] which rely
on “rewinding”. Namely, our proof does not require proof of knowledge but heav-
ily relies on zero-knowledge proof of membership. Tight reduction usually comes
at a cost, but it turns out that our scheme has a tight reduction without sacri-
ﬁcing on eﬃciency. In toto, this scheme gives the most eﬃcient linkable/unique
ring signature in the ROM, in terms of key generation, signing, and veriﬁcation
algorithms.

Typically, one evaluates provably secure signature schemes from three per-
spectives: eﬃciency, indicating how fast the scheme can be implemented, which
has an immediate impact on its genuine utility; concrete security reduction, which
gives explicit bounds on success probability of the adversary, enabling meaningful
comparisons for a given level of provable security; and cryptographic assumption-
s, preferably being simple, standard, and well-studied, on which the security of
the scheme relies. A desirable provably secure cryptographic signature, common-
ly recognized, whether in the random oracle standard or the standard model,
should be at ﬁrst eﬃcient, and could be as well tightly related to a reasonable
assumption. Of course, it is also desirable to consider various tradeoﬀs among
the three factors, provided that the scheme is still suﬃciently eﬃcient.

For signature schemes based on discrete logarithm problems, the most ef-
ﬁcient scheme is the Schnorr signature [24] that is proven secure in the ROM
under the DL assumption by Pointcheval and Stern [22]. The technique used
is the Forking Lemma: by rewinding the forger O(qh/ε) times, where qh de-
notes the number of the forger makes to the random oracles and ε denotes its
success probability one can compute the discrete logarithm of the public key.
The reduction is unfortunately too loose. To obtain tight security reductions
for the DL-based signature schemes, a number of constructions that are less

Unique Ring Signatures: A Practical Construction

3

eﬃcient or/and under stronger assumptions are proposed, including the EDL
scheme by Goh and Jarecki [16] (under the CDH assumption), subsequent work
by Chevallier-Mames [6] (under the CDH assumption), two schemes by Katz
and Wang [18] (from the CDH and DDH problems respectively), and Fischlin’s
scheme [10] (that relies on the DL assumption but is relatively ineﬃcient).

Turning to the DL-type ring signature schemes, tight reductions are more
challenging to achieve. This is due, ﬁrst, to the fact that all the DL based ones,
to the best of our knowledge, follow the CDS paradigm [8] whose security seems
to inevitably rely on the (generalized) rewinding technique (see, e.g., [17]). This
is further due to the fact that the ring signature runs in the multi-user setting
such that the reduction might naturally lose a factor of n which denotes the
number of users in the ring. Last, we emphasize that ring signatures (in general)
have multiple security notions such as unforgeability, anonymity, and possibly
some others (see [3]). Tight reductions (to possibly diﬀerent assumptions) here
should be satisﬁed for all the required security notions. To put it diﬀerently, the
security notion with the loosest reduction and the strongest assumption is the
benchmark against which the security of the system can be measured.

The linkable ring signature [19] from the DDH assumption inherit the CDS
framework and its analysis for ordinary ring signatures. In particular, if we let
ε be an upper bound on the probability that the DL problem can be solved,
then the success probability of any adversaries attacking the unforgeability is
roughly nqhε, but for anonymity one has to rely on the potentially stronger
DDH assumption. Similar results hold for the traceable ring signature [13], where
Fujisaki and Suzuki therefore consider using Fischlin’s technique [10, Remark 5.7]
to improve the reduction tightness at a notable cost.

Instead, our random oracle based scheme has security tightly reduced to the
DDH problem for each of the security notions, which implies that the scheme is as
secure as the DDH problem. One main reason our scheme has tight reductions
is the use of NIZK proof of membership, instead of the conventional proof of
knowledge such that one has to rewind the forger for suﬃcient times.

For standard signature and ring signature schemes, to obtain tighter security,
they necessarily become less eﬃcient or rely on stronger assumptions. In contrast,
our unique ring signature scheme is as eﬃcient as the previous scheme [19] with
a loose reduction. Notice that the PRF part not only enables NIZK proof of
membership but happens to serve as the unique identiﬁer.

2 Unique Ring Signature Model
We begin by recalling the deﬁnition of a ring signature scheme RS = (RK, RS, RV)
that consists of three algorithms:

RK(1λ). The randomized user key generation algorithm takes as input the
security parameter λ and outputs a public key pk and a secret key sk.
RS(sk, R, m). The probabilistic ring signing algorithm takes as input a
user secret key sk, a ring R that is a set of public keys (such that pk ∈ R),
and a message m to return a signature σ on m with respect to the ring R.

4

Matthew Franklin and Haibin Zhang

RV(R, m, σ). The deterministic ring veriﬁcation algorithm takes as input
a ring R, a message m, and a signature σ for m to return a single bit b.

The following correctness condition is required: for any security parameter λ,
any integer n, any {(pki, ski)}n
1 ), any i ∈ [n],
and any m, it holds that RV(R, m, RS(R, ski, m)) = 1.

$← RK(1λ) (where now R = {pki}n

1

We consider unique ring signature where the signature should have the form of
(R, m, σ) = (R, m, τ, π) where τ is the unique identiﬁer for some message m
and some signer i, and π is the rest of the signature. For our constructions,
one may simply consider that τ is the signature, and π is the corresponding
(maybe probabilistic) proof of correctness. Following the recent formulation for
ring signature due to Bender, Katz, and Morselli [3], we deﬁne for unique ring
signature three security requirements: uniqueness, anonymity, and unforgeability.
The way we deﬁne uniqueness property largely follows from that for unique
group signature [11], where the uniqueness security is coupled to a non-colliding
property. The formalization of the deﬁnitions of security can be found in [12].

3 Unique Ring Signature in Random Oracle Model

We start by describing our basic underlying signature/VRF scheme, and then
give the construction of unique ring signature. Notice that our proof techniques
do not require proof of knowledge but heavily rely on zero-knowledge proof of
membership, which is one of the main reasons our signature enjoys tight security
reductions and admits an improvement in eﬃciency for a given level of security.
The Underlying VRF Scheme. The signature we shall describe is ﬁrst pred-
icated on a (well-known) observation that given a random public group element
y = gx, the function F (m) := H(m)x is a PRF, if we model the hash function
H(·) as a random oracle.

Our scheme is furthermore based on a well-known zero-knowledge proof sys-

tem for equality of discrete logarithm due to Chaum and Pederson [5]:
A prover and a veriﬁer both know (g, h, y1, y2) with g, h (cid:54)= 1 and y1 = gx and
y2 = hx for an exponent x ∈ Zq. A prover also knows the exponent x. They run
the following protocol:
1. The prover chooses r $← Zq and sends a ← gr, b ← hr to the veriﬁer.
2. The veriﬁer sends a challenge c $← Zq to the prover.
3. The prover sends t ← r − cx mod q to the veriﬁer.
4. The veriﬁer accepts iﬀ a = gtyc

1 and b = htyc
2.

The above protocol is a sound proof system but also honest-veriﬁer zero-knowledge
(HVZK). By using Fiat-Shamir transformation [13], it becomes a NIZK proof
system if we model the hash function as a random oracle. Given the above PRF
and NIZK proof system, we apply the Bellare-Goldwasser (BG) paradigm [2] to
obtain a VRF scheme depicted in Figure 1. (The scheme is in fact a PRF with
a NIZK proof and of course a secure signature scheme.) Note that the function

Unique Ring Signatures: A Practical Construction

5

that maps x to gx is not a commitment scheme: the binding property is satisﬁed
while the hiding property is not. This prevents us from following the general BG
construction’s proof strategy exactly. However, under the DDH assumption, this
can be proven secure with a similar proof to that of BG signature.

Setup(1λ).

The setup algorithm takes as input the security parameter λ and outputs a mul-
tiplicative group G of prime order q and a randomly chosen generator g of G. It also
provides two hash functions H: {0, 1}∗ → G and H(cid:48): {0, 1}∗ → Zq. It outputs the
public parameters as

pp = (λ, q, G, H, H(cid:48)).

Gen(1λ, pp).

The key generation algorithm takes as input the parameter pp and chooses x $← Zq

and sets y ← gx. It outputs the public key as pk = y and the secret key as sk = x.
Sig(sk, m).

To sign the message m, the signer selects r $← Zq and computes

(m, H(m)x, c, t),
where c ← H(cid:48)(m, gr, H(m)r) and t ← r − cx mod q.
Vrf(sk, m, σ) .

The veriﬁcation algorithm ﬁrst parses σ as (m, τ, c, t) and checks if

(cid:48)

c = H

(m, gtyc, H(m)tτ c).

Fig. 1. Eﬃcient Signature/VRF from the DDH assumption in the random
oracle model. The algorithms are described in the context of digital signature. It is
also a VRF scheme, where VRF.Eva(sk, m) = H(m)x, VRF.Prove(sk, m) = (c, t), and
VRF.Ver(m, σ) = DS.Vrf(m, σ).

Extending the underlying proof system. We now extend the underlying
NIZK proof to an “or” language—a proof system that a unique identiﬁer τ (for a
message m and a ring R) has the same logarithm with respect to base H(m||R)
as one of the public keys yj := gxj (j ∈ [n]) with respect to base g. Assume,
without loss of generality, logH(m||R) τ = logg yi and the prover knows xi. In
particular, we use the proof system between a prover and a veriﬁer.
1. For j ∈ [n] and j (cid:54)= i, the prover selects cj, tj

j and bj ← H(m)tj (H(m)xi)cj ; for j = i, the prover selects ri

gtj ycj
and computes ai ← gri and bi ← H(m)ri. It sends {aj, bj}n

2. The veriﬁer sends a challenge c $← Zq to the prover.

3. The prover computes ci ← c −(cid:80)

$← Zq and computes aj ←
$← Zq
1 to the veriﬁer.
j(cid:54)=i cj and t ← r − cixi mod q, and sends
j and bj = H(m)tj τ cj for every j ∈ [n].

c1, t1,··· , cn, tn to the veriﬁer.

4. The veriﬁer accepts iﬀ aj = gtj ycj

6

Matthew Franklin and Haibin Zhang

The above protocol combines the Chaum-Pederson (CP) technique for proving
the equality of two discrete logarithms of [5] and Cramer-Damg˚ard-Schoenmakers
(CDS) transformation [8]. Since both of the conversions “preserve” the properties
of Σ -protocols, the above system is a sound proof system,1 and also an inter-
active honest-veriﬁer zero-knowledge of membership. However, as far as we are
concerned, its soundness property has never been used in any signature schemes
related to the above proof system. (This is perhaps due to the fact no one needs
this property in these schemes anyway.) We now prove that the above proof
system is sound;2 in particular, even an arbitrarily malicious prover P ∗ cannot
convince the veriﬁer to accept a false statement.
Proof. The goal is to show that if logH(m) τ (cid:54)= logg yj for every j ∈ [n], then
given any {aj, bj}n
1 sent by P ∗ there is at most one value c for which P ∗ can
respond correctly. Recall above that we let x0 denote logH(m) τ and xj denote
logg yj for every j ∈ [n]. In this case, we have that x0 (cid:54)= xj (j ∈ [n]). Given any
{aj, bj}n
j ) sent to the veriﬁer by a
cheating prover, we have the following: if the veriﬁer is to accept, then we must
have that

1 (where we assume aj = grj and bj = H(m)r(cid:48)

n(cid:88)

c =

cj,

and for every j ∈ [n],

1

aj = gt1ycj
j ,
bj = H(m)tj τ cj .
By (2) and (3) we obtain that for every j ∈ [n],

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

rj = tj + xjcj,
r(cid:48)
j = tj + x0cj.

(5)
j)(xo − xj)−1
Noting that x0 (cid:54)= xj for every j ∈ [n], we have cj ← (rj − r(cid:48)
mod q. According to equation (1), we can now conclude that there is at most
one challenge which the cheating prover can respond to. Therefore, the veriﬁer
generates this challenge with probability 1/q and the proof now follows.

If we turn the above system into a NIZK proof system by following Fiat-Shamir
transformation through a hash function H(cid:48) then one can check that the sound-
ness property is bounded by qh/q, where qh denotes the number of times the
adversary makes to the random oracle H(cid:48). Indeed, in this case, for any {aj, bj}n
1 Strictly speaking, Σ -protocols can be divided into two categories: Σ -protocols for
proof of knowledge, and Σ -protocols for proof of membership. In particular, we can
formally show, in the setting of proof of membership, the special soundness property
implies that a Σ -protocol is always an interactive proof system.

1

2 This is needed, since we shall be providing the exact bound on the soundness property

in the random oracle model which appears in our full paper [12].

Unique Ring Signatures: A Practical Construction

7

and any query H(m,{aj, bj}n
1 ) made by an adversary P ∗, it follows from the
above proof that there is at most one possible value of c satisfying the veriﬁ-
cation equations. The unique ring signature (from the DDH assumption in the
ROM) is described in Figure 2.

Setup(1λ).

The setup algorithm takes as input the security parameter λ and outputs a mul-
tiplicative group G of prime order q and a randomly chosen generator g of G. It also
provides two hash functions H: {0, 1}∗ → G and H(cid:48): {0, 1}∗ → Zq. It outputs the
public parameters as

pp = (λ, q, G, H, H(cid:48)).

RG(1λ, pp).

The key generation algorithm for user i takes as input the parameter pp and selects
$← Zq and computes yi ← gxi . It outputs the public key as pki = (pp, yi)

an element xi
and the secret key as ski = (pp, xi).

RS(ski, R, m).

To sign the message m in the ring R = (pk1, ..., pkn), the signer i with the secret

key ski = xi generates the signature in the following way:
1. (Simulation step.) For j ∈ [n] and j (cid:54)= i, select cj, tj

gtj ycj

j and bj ← H(m||R)tj (H(m||R)xi )cj .

$← Zq and compute aj ←

1 ) −(cid:80)

$← Zq and compute ai ← gri and bi ← H(m||R)ri .

j(cid:54)=i cj mod q and ti ← ri − cixi mod q.

2. For j = i, select ri
3. Let ci ← H(cid:48)(m, R,{aj, bj}n
4. Return (R, m, H(m||R)xi , c1, t1,··· , cn, tn).
RV(R, m, σ).
(τ, c1, t1,··· , cn, tn) and checks if

(cid:80)n
1 cj = H(cid:48)(m, R,{gtj ycj

j , H(m||R)tj τ cj}n
1 ).

On receiving the signature (R, m, σ), the veriﬁcation algorithm ﬁrst parses σ as

Fig. 2. Unique ring signature from the DDH assumption in the ROM.

The following theorem establishes the security of the above scheme (with proof
and exact security bounds in our full paper [12]).

Theorem 1. The scheme presented in this section is a unique ring signature in
the random oracle model under the DDH assumption.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Tsz Hon Yuen and anonymous reviewers for comments.

References

1. M. Au, S. Chow, W. Susilo, and P. Tsang. Short linkable ring signatures revisited.

EUROPKI 2006, LNCS vol. 4043, Springer, pp. 101–115, 2006.

2. M. Bellare and S. Goldwasser. New paradigms for digital signatures and mes-
sage authentication based on non-interative zero knowledge proofs. CRYPTO ’89,
LNCS vol. 435, Springer, pp. 194–211, 1990.

3. A. Bender, J. Katz, and R. Morselli. Ring signatures: stronger deﬁnitions, and
constructions without random oracles. Journal of Cryptology 22(1): 114–138, 2009.

8

Matthew Franklin and Haibin Zhang

4. D. Chaum and H. Antwerpen. Undeniable signatures. In CRYPTO ’89, LNCS

vol. 435, Springer, pp. 212–216, 1990.

5. D. Chaum and T. Pedersen. Wallet databases with observers. CRYPTO ’92, LNCS

vol. 740, Springer, pp. 89–105, 1993.

6. B. Chevallier-Mames. An eﬃcient CDH-based signature scheme with a tight se-

curity reduction. CRYPTO 2005, LNCS vol. 3621, Springer, pp. 511–526, 2005.

7. S. Chow, W. Susilo, and T.H. Yuen. Escrowed linkability of ring signatures and its

applications. VIETCRYPT 2006, LNCS vol. 4341, pp. 172–192, Springer, 2006.

8. R. Cramer, I. Damg˚ard, and B. Schoemakers. Proofs of partial knowledge and sim-
pliﬁed design of witness hiding protocols. CRYPTO ’94, LNCS vol. 839, Springer,
pp. 174–187, 1994.

9. A. Fiat and A. Shamir. How to prove yourself: Practical solutions to identiﬁcation

and signature problems. CRYPTO ’86, LNCS vol. 263, pp. 186–194, 1987.

10. M. Fischlin. Communication-eﬃcient non-interactive proofs of knowledge with on-

line extractors. CRYPTO 2005, LNCS vol. 3621, Springer, pp. 152–168, 2005.

11. M. Franklin and H. Zhang. Unique group signatures. ESORICS 2012, LNCS
vol. 7459, Springer, pp. 643–660. Full version in Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report
2012/204. http://eprint.iacr.org

12. M. Franklin and H. Zhang. A Framework for Unique Ring Signatures. Cryptology

ePrint Archive: Report 2012/577. http://eprint.iacr.org

13. E. Fujisaki and K. Suzuki. Traceable ring signature. IEICE Transactions 91-A(1):

83–93 (2008).

14. E. Fujisaki. Sub-linear size traceable ring signatures without random oracles. CT-

RSA ’11, LNCS vol. 6558, Springer, pp. 393–415, 2011.

15. E. Goh, S. Jarecki, J. Katz, and N. Wang. Eﬃcient signature schemes with tight
security reductions to the Diﬃe-Hellman problems. J. of Cryptology 20(4): 493–
514, 2007.

16. E. Goh and S. Jarecki. A signature scheme as secure as the Diﬃe-Hellman problem.

EUROCRYPT 2003, LNCS vol. 2656, Springer, pp. 401–415, 2003.

17. J. Herranz and G. S´aez. Forking lemmas for ring signature schemes. INDOCRYPT

2003, LNCS vol. 2904, Springer, pp. 266–279, 2003.

18. J. Katz and N. Wang. Eﬃciency improvements for signature schemes with tight

security reductions. CCS 2003, ACM press, pp. 155–164, 2003.

19. J. Liu, V. Wei, and D. Wong. Linkable spontaneous anonymous group signatures

for ad hoc groups. ACISP 2004, LNCS vol. 3108, Springer, pp. 325–335, 2004.

20. J. Liu and D. Wong. Linkable ring signatures: Security models and new schemes.

ICCSA 2005, LNCS vol. 3481, Springer, pp. 614–623, 2005.

21. S. Micali and L. Reyzin. Improving the exact security of digital signature schemes.

J. Cryptology, 15(1): 1–18, 2002.

22. D. Pointcheval and J. Stern. Security arguments for digital signatures and blind

signatures. J. Cryptology, 13(3): 361–396, 2000.

23. R. Rivest, A. Shamir, and Y. Tauman. How to leak a secret: Theory and appli-
cations of ring signatures. Theoretical Computer Science, Essays in Memory of
Shimon Even, LNCS vol. 3895, Springer, pp. 164–186, 2006.

24. C.-P. Schnorr. Eﬃcient identiﬁcation and signatures for smart cards. CRYP-

TO ’89, LNCS vol. 435, Springer, pp. 239–252, 1990.

25. P. Tsang and V. Wei. Short linkable ring signatures for e-voting, e-cash and at-

testation. IPSEC 2005, LNCS vol. 3439, Springer, pp. 48–60, 2005.

26. P. Tsang, V. Wei, T. Chan, M. Au, J. Liu, and D. Wong. Separable linkable
threshold ring signatures. INDOCRYPT 2004, LNCS vol. 3348, pp. 389–398, 2004.

