Four Week Summer Program in Cyber Security for High School Students:

Practice and Experience Report

Melissa Danforth (melissa@cs.csub.edu) and Charles Lam (clam@csub.edu)

California State University, Bakersﬁeld

1 Introduction
Cyber security education and outreach is a national pri-
ority. It is critical to encourage high school students to
pursue studies in cyber security and related ﬁelds. High
school outreach is a fundamental component of a cohe-
sive cyber security education program. Most high school
outreach programs in cyber security focus on short-term
events such as a capture the ﬂag contest or the CyberPa-
triot competition. While a competitive event is engaging
for high school students, it does not give a comprehen-
sive overview of cyber security education and careers.

We explored the use of a four-week, hands-on, inten-
sive summer program for engaging and encouraging high
school students to pursue cyber security education and
careers. The program brings high school students and
high school teachers onto the university campus to inter-
act with university professors and university students.
2 Background and Demographics
The summer program in cyber security builds upon
an existing program for STEM high school outreach
called Research Experience Vitalizing Science - Univer-
sity Program (REVS-UP). REVS-UP was designed from
research into effective STEM outreach through hands-
on experiences [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and primarily fo-
cuses on more traditional science and mathematics dis-
ciplines. REVS-UP is sponsored by Chevron and it has
become very popular with local high school students. In
2013, 386 students applied to approximately 100 avail-
able seats in REVS-UP.

This program augmented REVS-UP with two cyber
security projects: cryptography and computer/network
security. The cryptography project was led by Dr.
Charles Lam in the Mathematics department. The net-
work security project was led by Dr. Melissa Danforth
in the Computer Science Department. Each project also
had a CSUB student assistant who is involved in the cy-
ber security program at CSUB.

When assigning students to REVS-UP projects, stu-
dents are ﬁrst assigned based on their stated preferences.
If there are any seats remaining in the two cyber secu-
rity projects after this initial assignment, students who
have not expressed a preference and were not placed in
another REVS-UP project are offered an opportunity to
participate. This helps the project reach a wide range
of students who might not have otherwise considered a
cyber security project. Approximately half of the high

Table 1: Demographic data for participating high school
students in the summer of 2013

1 Decline to State

8 Asian

Ethnicity

1 Black/African American

2 Two or More Races

Gender

8 Female

3 Hispanic
3 White
10 Male

school students who participated in the summer of 2013
were recruited in this fashion.

8 high school students participated in the com-
puter/network security project and 10 high school stu-
dents participated in the cryptography project in summer
2013. As shown in Table 1, the demographics of the
students reﬂect the diversity of the community in which
CSUB is located. Seven local high schools were the
source of students participating in the project, including
three high-needs high schools.
3 Program Details
High schools students were on campus for four days each
week, and attended from 9:00am to 3:00pm with a break
for lunch. The time was split between lectures, work-
sheets, and conducting hands-on activities. REVS-UP
concludes the fourth week of activities with a half-day
poster competition for all participating students. The ma-
jority of the fourth week was spent preparing posters.

Students in the cryptography project were introduced
to basic number theory and its use in modern-day en-
cryption. They also learned about the history of cryptog-
raphy and modern uses of cryptography. Students used a
variety of hand-tracing techniques and mathematics pro-
grams such as Maple to model problems in number the-
ory and cryptography. See Table 2 for a breakdown of
the topics covered by week.

For their hands-on activities in cryptography, the stu-
dents began with self exploratory worksheets on tra-
ditional substitution ciphers, the Euclidean Algorithm,
modular arithmetic, the concept of inverse, Fermat’s Lit-
tle Theorem, and RSA encryption. This prepared them
for their hands-on activities in the following three areas:
factoring and its effects on RSA, elliptic curve cryptog-
raphy, and zero knowledge protocols.

Students in the factoring project modeled three factor-
ization algorithms to see the strengths and weaknesses
of each algorithm. They also learned how rapid fac-
torization would undermine the RSA algorithm. Stu-
dents in the elliptic curve cryptography project learned
about the foundations of the technique and how it com-

Cryptography

Computer/
Network
Security

Table 2: Breakdown of general weekly activities in the two cyber security projects

Week 1
Simple Substitution
Cipher, Polyalphabetic
Substitution Cipher,
Euclidean Algorithm,
Modular Arithmetic,
Worksheets on Topics
Ethics and Legality,
Security Concepts,
Authentication Proto-
cols, Password Hash-
ing and Cracking, Us-
ing Linux, Hands-on
Activities

Week 2
Fermat’s Little Theo-
rem, Modular Expo-
nentiation Algorithm,
RSA Encryption Al-
gorithm and Proof,
Worksheets on Topics
Password Practices,
Secure Authentica-
tion Protocols, TCP/IP
Networking, Network
Attacks, Social Engi-
neering, Hands-on Ac-
tivities

Week 3
Hands-on Activi-
ties, including Pro-
gramming and Ex-
perimentation

Week 4
Prepare Poster on
Hands-on Activi-
ties

Malware, Access
Control, Protecting
Information, “Best
Practices” for Secu-
rity, More on So-
cial Engineering,
Hands-on Activities

Prepare Poster on
Hands-on Activi-
ties, Watch Videos
on Recent Secu-
rity Topics (e.g.
SmartTV hack,
DefCon, etc.)

pares to other algorithms like RSA. Students in the zero
knowledge group learned about the Fiat-Shamir proto-
col and its weaknesses. They also learned about the
Guillon-Quisquarter protocol and how it compares to
Fiat-Shamir.

Students in the computer/network security project
were focused on operational security and user authen-
tication. The students learned about traditional security
principles such as conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availabil-
ity. The majority of the time was focused on user authen-
tication, attacks against network services, attacks against
stored passwords, social engineering, and malware ba-
sics. The importance of ethics in cyber security was also
emphasized. See Table 2 for a week-by-week breakdown
of topics.

Students in this project typically spent the morning
learning about a topic collectively as a group, and then
would split into smaller groups to work on their hands-
on activities in the afternoon. Two hands-on projects
were conducted: social engineering and using GPU rigs
to crack hashed passwords.

Students in the social engineering group read portions
of the book “Social Engineering” by Christopher Had-
nagy, watched videos of social engineering techniques in
practice, and learned about methods to counter-act com-
mon social engineering techniques. Students in the pass-
word security group used a simple GPU rig consisting of
two ATI video cards to crack passwords that were hashed
with several algorithms. Students used several common
Linux command line tools, like sha1sum, to create their
own hashed password ﬁle containing simple, medium,
and secure passwords to see how long it took the rig to
recover the passwords.

4 Conclusions
Student comments in a post-activity survey reﬂect a pos-
itive experience with most of the program. Most of the

students would recommend the outreach program to their
friends, and most said the program increased their inter-
est in attending college. The primary dissatisfaction was
with the REVS-UP poster competition.
5 Acknowledgments
Partial support for this work was provided by the
National Science Foundation’s Federal Cyber Service:
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program under Award No.
1241636. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
National Science Foundation.
References
[1] P. R. Aschbacher, E. Li, et al. Is Science Me? High School Stu-
dents’ Identities, Participation and Aspirations in Science, Engi-
neering, and Medicine. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
47(5):564 – 582, 2010.

[2] R. L. Bell, L. M. Blair, et al.

Just do it? Impact of a science
apprenticeship program on high school students’ understanding of
the nature of science and scientiﬁc inquiry. Journal of Research in
Science Training, 40(5):487 – 509, 2003.

[3] J. Charney, C. E. Hmelo-Silver, et al. Cognitive apprenticeship in
science through immersion in laboratory practices. International
Journal of Science Education, 29(2):195 – 213, 2007.

[4] K. Grindstaff and G. Richmond. Learners’ perceptions of the role
of peers in a research experience implications for the apprentice-
ship process, scientiﬁc inquiry, and collaborative work. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 45(2):251 – 271, 2008.

[5] D. M. Hammond and M. M. Lalor. Promoting STEM careers
among undergraduates through interdisciplinary engineering re-
search. Council on Undergraduate Research Quarterly, 30(2):26
– 33, 2009.

[6] D. G. Markowitz. Evaluation of the long-term impact of a univer-
sity high school summer science program on students’ interest and
perceived abilities in science. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 13(3):395 – 407, 2004.

[7] J. E. Stake and K. R. Mares. Evaluating the impact of science-
enrichment programs on adolescents’ science motivation and con-
ﬁdence: The splashdown effect. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 42(4):359 – 375, 2005.

