A Cybersecurity Test and Evaluation Facility for the Next Generation Air 

Transportation System (NextGen) 

 

David Ingegneri, CyTF Engineer   Dominic Timoteo, CyTF Engineer   Patrick Hyle, CyTF Engineer 

Fidel Parraga, Support CyTF Engineer   Alex Reyes, Support CyTF Engineer 

it 

tools 

testing 

(FAA) 

transitions 

cybersecurity 

 
Abstract 
The  Federal  Aviation  Administration 
is 
developing  the  Cybersecurity  Test  and  Evaluation 
Facility (CyTF) for the FAA Air Transportation System 
the  Next  Generation  Air 
as 
to 
Transportation  System 
(NextGen). 
  This  paper 
describes  the  goals,  capabilities,  architecture,  current 
implementation, initial experience, lessons learned and 
future  implementation  of  the  CyTF.    The  FAA  Air 
Transportation  System  is  an  attractive  cybersecurity 
threat  target  and  the  FAA  must  proactively  and 
continually  adjust  its  cybersecurity  capabilities  to 
match  the  changing  cybersecurity  threat  landscape.  
The  CyTF  is  providing  an  adaptable  cybersecurity 
research and development environment independent of 
the  operational  system  to  satisfy  research,  test  and 
evaluation needs.  The CyTF has a number of complex 
requirements: 
and 
technologies  prior  to  their  integration  into  the  Air 
Transportation  System,  the  evaluation  of  individual 
FAA  Air  Transportation  subsystems  security,  security 
of  end-to-end  services  involving  multiple  subsystems, 
procedures to respond and recover from a cybersecurity 
event and cybersecurity training of the FAA workforce.  
One  of  the  major  lessons  learned,  described  in  the 
paper,  has  been  how  to  address  some  aspects  of  the 
CyTF’s complex requirements.  
1.  Introduction  
As  the  cybersecurity  threat  landscape  continues  to 
evolve,  the  FAA  must  proactively  and  continually 
adjust the cybersecurity capabilities of the Nation’s Air 
Transportation  System  in  order  to  maintain  a  safe  and 
resilient information systems environment.  The CyTF 
is  providing  a  state-of-the-art  independent,  adaptable 
and  scalable  cybersecurity  environment  to  satisfy 
research,  test  and  evaluation  needs  without  impacting 
performance  and  availability  of 
the  FAA  Air 
Transportation  System.  Cybersecurity  threat  actors, 
including  criminal  organizations  and  nation-state 
adversaries,  have  become  very  sophisticated;  they  are 
usually  well  funded,  use  advanced  and  persistent 

methods of attack, and pose the greatest security risk to 
organizations  with  critical  missions  such  as  the  FAA 
Air Transportation System. 

The  FAA  Air  Transportation  System  is  a  large  and 
complex system of systems based on legacy and state-
of-the-art  technology.  Like  other  industrial  control 
systems,  the  Air  Transportation  System  has  unique 
performance,  reliability  and  safety  requirements.  The 
Air  Transportation  System  interfaces  with  Department 
of  Defense  system  components  to  provide  aviation 
security and defense.  The key characteristics of the Air 
Transportation System and its critical mission make it a 
very attractive target for a cybersecurity attack.   

to 

improve 

The FAA Next Generation Air Transportation System, 
(NextGen), depicted in Figure 1, is part of the Nation’s 
critical  infrastructure.    NextGen  includes  components 
shared with various international, national, state, local, 
and  private  entities 
the  overall  air 
transportation  system.    NextGen  will  improve  the  air 
transportation  system  capacity  and  safety  through  the 
use of high performance and cost effective technologies 
including  satellite  based  surveillance,  air-ground  data 
communications, and a state of the art communications 
system.  Figure 1 represents an operational concept of 
NextGen  [6]  that  defines  the  various  components  and 
systems  that  make  up  the  FAA  Air  Transportation 
System  with  a  focus  on  NextGen  improvements.    The 
goal  of  NextGen 
is  to  improve  the  overall  air 
transportation  system  with  a  focus  on  NextGen 
capabilities  that  provide  the  greatest  results.    Some  of 
these  NextGen capabilities are circled in red in Figure 
1  and  include:  aircraft  trajectory  based  operations, 
performance-based  services,  weather  assimilated  into 
decision-making,  super  density  operations,  equivalent 
visual  operations,  layered  adaptive  security,  position, 
navigation, 
network-enabled 
information  access.    Progress  is  moving  forward  to 
meet 
the  FAA  Air 
Transportation system is a complex and unique system 
that requires the correct blend of technical, policy, and 
operational improvements to succeed. 

the  NextGen  goals  but 

timing, 

and 

and 

 

Page 1 of 8 

Figure 1 - NextGen Capabilities 

require 

System 

The  unique  characteristics  of  the  FAA  NextGen  Air 
Transportation 
cybersecurity 
capabilities,  tools  and  technologies  that  are  adjusted 
and  adapted  to  satisfy  those  unique  characteristics.  
However,  these  cybersecurity  safeguards  must  be 
tested  before 
thoroughly  evaluated, 
making  decisions 
in 
the  Air 
Transportation System to ensure their effectiveness and 
that  their  integration  will  not  impact  performance, 
reliability and safety.   

tailored,  and 
them 

to  deploy 

to 

the  ability 

The disruption of the FAA NextGen Air Transportation 
System  would  have  a  debilitating  safety,  security,  and 
economic  impact  and  may  prevent  the  FAA  from 
performing its mission.  The value of the CyTF resides 
in 
integrate  required  cybersecurity 
capabilities, tools and technologies while continuing to 
maintain a safe, secure and resilient Air Transportation 
System.  The CyTF is working to become the state-of-
the-art  information  system  environment  to  perform 
cybersecurity research, test and evaluation that supports 
and enables the mission of the FAA.   
2.  Goals  
to  provide 
The  primary  goal  of 
cybersecurity research; test and evaluation services that 
improve  the  cybersecurity  posture  of  and  address  the 
changing  threat  landscape  to  the  FAA  NextGen  Air 
Transportation  System.    To  achieve  the  primary  goal, 
the  CyTF  is  providing  a  scalable  and  adaptable 
environment to support: 

the  CyTF 

is 

1.  The 

identification 

of 
cybersecurity  threats  and  risks  by  simulating  the  FAA 
Air  Transportation  System  to  determine  impact  to  the 
FAA’s mission. 

validation 

and 

2.  The  integration  of  cybersecurity  capabilities, 
tools  and  technologies  to  protect  information  systems, 
data and infrastructure, while satisfying the strict needs 
for safety, security and availability. 

3.  The transition to a continuous monitoring of the 
information  system  environment  to  effectively  and 
efficiently detect and prevent cybersecurity events. 

4.  The  process  improvement  to  respond  and 
recover from cybersecurity events and attacks including 
advanced  and  persistent  attacks  from  criminal  groups 
and nation-state adversaries. 

5.  The  process 

to  assess  and 

the 
resilience of information systems ability to operate and 
perform  the  FAA’s  mission  even  when  affected  by  a 
cybersecurity event or attack.  

improve 

There  are  many 
in-progress  and  planned  FAA 
cybersecurity  initiatives,  studies  and  assessments  to 
address  the  evolving  threat  landscape.    The  CyTF  is 
providing  the  Research  and  Development  test  and 
evaluation  environment  to  support  those  efforts  and 
validate results. 
3.  Key Characteristics 
To  achieve  its  goals  CyTF  must  incorporate  the 
following key requirements and characteristics: 

Page 2 of 8 

1.  The  CyTF  must  replicate  with  high  fidelity 
the  FAA 

systems,  services,  and  capabilities  of 
operational Air Transportation System. 

2.  The CyTF systems must be independent of the 
operational  environment  they  replicate  so  that  CyTF 
experiments  can  be  conducted  without  affecting  the 

4.  High-level Architecture 
The Architecture of the CyTF, as depicted in Figure 2, 
includes  five  major  components:  the  target  systems  to 
be  tested,  the  CyTF  management  function,  the  CyTF 
testing  capabilities,  the  CyTF  local  network,  and  the 
CyTF  plans,  policies,  and  procedures  (the  applicable 
Rules  of  Behavior  related 
to  exercise/experiment 

performance of the operational systems.  

processes). 

Figure 2 - High Level CyTF Architecture 

3.  The  CyTF  systems  and  subsystems  must  be 
extensible  to  allow  the  addition  and  testing  of  new 
security approaches and security prototypes. 

4.  The CyTF must be highly adaptable but have a 

number of stable core baselines.  

a.  The  CyTF  can  be  used 

to  conduct 
experiments that utilize individual systems, systems of 
systems,  or  represent  an  enterprise  architecture  that 
supports a variety of scenarios. 

b.  The  CyTF  can  be  reset  to  a  stable  core 

baseline at the conclusion of experiments. 

5.  The CyTF must be able to evaluate, verify, and 
validate  information  security  controls  in  the  FAA  Air 
Transportation System. 

6.  The  CyTF  must  facilitate  cooperation  with 
industry,  academia,  and  government  to  maintain  and 
improve the security posture of the FAA NextGen Air 
Transportation System. 

7.  The  CyTF  must  be  able  to  utilize  existing 
developmental  FAA  air  traffic  capabilities  and  R&D 
networks. 

8.  The  CyTF  must  have  asset  discovery  and 

vulnerability identification capabilities. 

test  beds  accessible 

The  target  systems  to  be  tested  are  select  operational 
components of the FAA Air Transportation System that 
are  either  virtualized  in  CyTF  or  that  exist  in  other 
to  CyTF  via  existing 
FAA 
connections 
  This 
element  of  the  architecture  fulfills  the  first  two  CyTF 
requirements:  reflecting  the  FAA  Air  Transportation 
System with high fidelity, and not impacting real-world 
operational performance and availability. 

to  external  facilities/networks. 

in 

function  provides 

The  CyTF  management 
the 
capability to configure the CyTF environment, enables 
capturing  experimental  data,  and  assists 
the 
preparation  of  follow-up  reports.    The  CyTF  testing 
capabilities  range from single component to enterprise 
testing  and  are  an  evolving  set  of  capabilities  as 
described  in  the  next  section.    The  CyTF  hosts  the 
virtualized  systems,  platforms  used  to  manage  CyTF 
capabilities, and interfaces to other FAA test beds and 
partners’  R&D  networks.    The  CyTF  plans,  policies, 
and procedures include a plan for overall configuration 
management and agreements to document connectivity 
and  testing  level  permissions  regarding  systems  to  be 
tested and/or simulated in the conduct of testing.  
5.  Capabilities  
The  CyTF  capabilities  were 
initially  developed 
exclusively  with  FAA  resources,  however  some  other 

Page 3 of 8 

capabilities are being developed with the support of the 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS)  Continuous 
Diagnostics  and  Mitigation  (CDM)  program.    CyTF 
includes capabilities to test and evaluate: 

1.  Select  cybersecurity  tools  and  technologies, 
the  FAA  or  under 

to  be  deployed 

either 
consideration for such deployment. 

in 

2.  Cybersecurity solutions to help determine their 
feasibility, effectiveness, and impact to the operational 
FAA Air Transportation System.  

3.  The  security  posture  of  individual  FAA  Air 

Transportation System systems; 

4.  Enterprise  security  functions,  e.g.  enterprise 
level  incident  response,  boundary  protection,  and 
backbone protection within an operational framework. 

In  addition  to  test  and  evaluation  CyTF  also  includes 
the following capabilities to: 

for  asset  discovery  and  vulnerability 

methods 
identification. 
6.  Planning, Implementation, Utilization  
Planning  of  CyTF  took  about  a  year.    Initial  planning 
involved visits by the FAA CyTF planning team to the 
DOT/FAA  Security  Operations  Center  to  understand 
their operations and to discuss their training processes.  
The  team  also  visited  FAA  partner  cyber-laboratory 
facilities  to  discuss  their  capabilities  and  learn  about 
their  cybersecurity  exercises.    The  team  observed  a 
large  scale  military  cyber-exercise  hosted  by  MIT 
Lincoln  Laboratory  at  their  cybersecurity  facility  in 
Lexington,  MA  and  subsequently  entered  into  an 
agreement  with  MIT  LL  to  support  the  expansion  of 
CyTF  into  a  cyber-range.    These  experiences  helped 
solidify  CyTF  planning  which  followed  the  FAA 
Systems  Engineering  procedures  and  produced  the 
following  CyTF  internal  documents:  a  Concept  of 
Operations  [1],  a  Functional  Architecture  [2],  and 

Figure 3 - CyTF Conceptual Layout 

5.  Train  designated  cybersecurity  staff  in  the  use 
of new and existing cybersecurity tools and processes, 
vetted through the T&E process. 

6.  Identify  vulnerabilities  and  select  applicable 

fixes and/or cybersecurity defenses.   

7.  Assess 

the  associated  risk  via  penetration 
testing in a virtual environment for those vulnerabilities 
that cannot be readily fixed or easily mitigated.  

listed 

replicate 

implementation  of  CyTF 

requirements  and 
The 
in  Section  3  enable  CyTF 
characteristics 
capabilities.  In particular, these capabilities require an 
independent  environment 
the 
operational  FAA  Air  Transportation  System  without 
impacting  its  operations,  a  highly  extensible  and 
adaptable  CyTF 
test 
scenarios, tools and solutions, a CyTF environment that 
facilitates 
internal  and  external  cooperation,  and 

to  accommodate  different 

that  can 

Functional and Performance Requirements [3].  

The  current  CyTF  implementation  was  dedicated  in 
October  2015  and  includes:  (1)  The  CyTF  local 
laboratory and network hosting the CyTF management 
function,  virtualized  systems,  and  gateways  to  other 
FAA  testbeds  and  CyTF  partners’  in  the  FAA  R&D 
network;  (2)  a  virtual  environment  that  contains  over 
30 routers and 120 virtual servers and workstations that 
simulates parts of the FAA Air Transportation System; 
(3)  connectivity  to  FAA  Air  Transportation  System 
replica systems within the CyTF and in other FAA test 
beds;  and  (4)  the  CyTF  testing  teams  that  include 
defensive  (blue),  offensive  (red),  and  orchestration 
(white) cybersecurity testing teams.  Figure 3 illustrates 
the CyTF conceptual layout described above.  

The  CyTF  implementation  is  congruent  with  CyTF 
the 
goals. 
transition  of  FAA’s  R&D 
system 

  CyTF  network  connectivity  enables 

information 

Page 4 of 8 

implementation  of  CyTF  can  go 

environment  from  sporadic  and  manual  to  automatic 
and  continuous  monitoring;  this  connectivity  also 
enables  CyTF  integration  with  Air  Transportation 
System  component-system  replicas  for  cybersecurity 
testing.    The  CyTF  virtual  environment  facilitates 
identification  of  cybersecurity  threats  and  risks  in  a 
high-fidelity network environment that is similar to, but 
isolated  from,  FAA  operations.    Process  improvement 
of  FAA’s  response  to  cybersecurity  events  is  also 
facilitated  via  the  CyTF  implementation’s  physical 
infrastructure augmented by the expertise of its staff of 
security subject matter experts. 
 
The 
through 
substantial changes to meet the needs of an experiment.  
The  CyTF  configuration  changes  are  governed  by  the 
CyTF Configuration Management (CM) plan [4] which 
identifies two levels of changes: (1) transitory changes 
to  accommodate  experiments; 
these  changes  are 
removed  at  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment,  and  (2) 
the  CyTF  core 
evolutionary  changes 
configuration; 
are  more 
permanent,  less  frequent,  and  respond  to  the  need  to 
improve  the  CyTF  core  capabilities.    CyTF  CM 
prescribes the process for making changes to the CyTF 
and it also identifies CM roles and responsibilities. 
To  date  CyTF  has  facilitated  information  security 
testing,  training,  and  evaluation  activities.    The  three 
tasks  described  in  this  section  illustrate  four  of  the 
seven  CyTF  capabilities  identified  in Section 5 of this 
paper. 
ERAM Security Tool Evaluation 

evolutionary 

that  affect 

changes 

and 

network 

vulnerability 

A  task  that  illustrates  CyTF capability #1 conducted a 
functional  and  performance  evaluation  of  a  complex 
commercial 
asset 
management  tool  integrated  with  the  FAA’s  En Route 
Automation  Modernization  (ERAM)  [5] 
  system. 
ERAM  primarily  supports  high-altitude  Air  Traffic 
Control  (ATC)  and  is  considered  the  backbone  of  the 
nation’s airspace system with processors for flight data, 
surveillance  data,  communications  and  display  data  to 
air traffic service providers.  CyTF leveraged the FAA 
R&D  Network  to  access  the  Interoperability  and 
Integration Facility (I2F), an FAA laboratory that has a 
hardware  and  software  instantiation  of  ERAM.    A 
software  agent  for  the  security  tool-under-test  was 
installed  on  each  of  the  38  ERAM  processors  at  the 
I2F;  the  agents  communicated  with  a  relay  at  the  I2F 
that  aggregated  the  data  and  sent  it  to  the  asset 
management 
  The 
evaluation  measured  the  tool’s  impact  on  the  ATC 
system  by  comparing  metrics  of  processor  utilization 
with  and  without 
the 
requirements  for  these  metrics  imposed  by  FAA  on 

tool  server  hosted  at  CyTF. 

the  agents 

installed 

to 

in 

to 

function 

ERAM.  A  typical  load  of  flight  and  surveillance  data 
consisting of 211 simultaneous aircraft tracks recorded 
at  the  FAA’s  Washington,  DC  Air  Route  Traffic 
Control Center, was used to feed ERAM and a scenario 
was  built  to  exercise  the  tool-under-test  in  the  way  it 
would  be  expected 
the  FAA 
environment.    This  functionality  is  primarily  endpoint 
asset  scanning  of  ERAM  hardware  &  software  that 
provides  detailed  information  on  operating  system, 
applications  and  utilities  for  each  ERAM  processor.  
Additionally  the  tool-under-test  was  used  to  install 
software  updates  on  certain  ERAM  processors.    The 
results  confirmed  that  there  was  no  impact  to  ERAM  
functionality  and  performance  under  expected  tool-
under-test  use  cases;  however,  an  atypical  use  case 
involving  an  initial  software  scan  during  ERAM  peak 
aircraft  processing  did  demonstrate  moderate  impact. 
From  these  results  CyTF  staff  generated  a  report  with 
recommendations  for  the  use  of  the  security  tool  on 
ERAM.   

impacted 

the  project  were 

This task revealed that the use of a partner laboratory, 
albeit  necessary,  can  have  a  complicating  effect  on 
estimating  task  schedule  and  cost.    Indeed,  all  aspects 
of 
from  planning 
(agreements between the laboratory organizations were 
required that specified funding), to conduct (logistics & 
scheduling,  connectivity  issues),  to  analysis  (data 
delivery & format issues).   
IPE Evaluation 
A task that exemplifies CyTF capability #2 conducted a 
feasibility  study  of  one  aspect  of  a  proposed  FAA 
security solution called Internal Protection Enforcement 
(IPE).    IPE  is  based  on  the  idea  that  the  FAA  Air 
Transportation  System  conforms  to  the  characteristics 
of an industrial control system (ICS) with a finite set of 
data  and  command  message  formats.    With  this 
characteristic  it  may  be  practical  to  conduct  low-level 
message whitelisting; i.e., block all traffic coming from 
non-FAA  networks  into  the  FAA  Air  Transportation 
System network and only allow the data and command 
messages  that  conform  to  specific  profiles.    This  is  in 
contrast  to  the  more  common  method  that  allows  all 
traffic and blocks only malware with known signatures. 
Whitelisting  is  very  effective  in  blocking  advanced 
threats  and  zero-day  attacks  but 
it  can  be 
computationally  intensive  when  applied  to  large  flows 
of data messages and it is not feasible for certain data 
formats  such  as  binary  data. 
  An  early  CyTF 
configuration was used to whitelist FAA incoming data 
containing  International  Civil  Aviation  Organization 
(ICAO) flight plan messages.  A whitelisting prototype 
was constructed using a programmable network device 
that  is being used by FAA in the NextGen timeframe.  
The  use  of  an  existing  device  for  IPE  can  be  a 
significant benefit since it is expensive in both time and 

Page 5 of 8 

to 

the 

money  to  add  and  maintain  a  new  device  in  the  Air 
Transportation  System.    Using  the  flight  data  sample 
the  prototype  established  that  100%  of  flight  plan 
messages  conforming 
test  profile  were 
successfully accepted and only 0.02% of non-compliant 
flight  plan  messages  were  accepted.    This  study 
examined  the  ability  to  whitelist  entire  messages  via 
regular expressions.  CyTF staff generated a report that 
concluded  this  level  of  whitelisting  was  technically 
feasible  using  the  FAA  device  but  more  testing  in  a 
more  realistic  FAA  network  traffic  environment  is 
needed to examine performance and scope issues.  This 
additional  testing  is  not  currently  planned  but  CyTF, 
supplemented with other FAA system laboratories, has 
the capability to conduct it.   
The  IPE task revealed the value of software engineers 
that  also  have  knowledge  of  FAA  networking  and 
messaging.    This  knowledge  base  was  critical  to 
completing the study in an acceptable amount of time. 
Incident Response Planning Exercise 

to  examine 

An example that spans CyTF Capabilities #4 and #5 is 
the FAA Incident Response Plan (IRP) Exercise.  This 
is a human-in-the-loop (HITL) exercise conducted over 
five  days 
the  FAA’s  cyber-incident 
response  processes  and  to  train  FAA  IT  and  cyber 
analysts  on  the  use  of  the  procedures  to  detect  and 
respond 
include 
improvements 
information  sharing, 
identifying  criteria  and 
strengthening  SOPs  and 
processes 
response  escalation  and 
reporting.    CyTF  hosted  the  2016  IRP  exercise  which 
had been a table-top; i.e., events on paper only, exercise 

  Expected  results 

in  stakeholder 

to 

intrusions. 

for 

incident 

and  is  armed  with  offensive  network  tools.    The  Blue 
Team is the incident detection and response team; they 
operate the CyTF defensive tools to block and contain 
the  intrusion.    The  White  Team  directs,  observes,  and 
collects  data  during  the  exercise.    CyTF,  as  shown  in 
Figure  4,  is  designed  to  accommodate  cyber  exercises 
and  has  the  means  to  configure  and  isolate  physical 
space for the needs of each team.  CyTF’s design was 
planned  from  the  start  to  be  extensible  via  the  use  of 
other  spaces  (specific  conference  rooms  with  direct 
CyTF connectivity and reconfigurable walls, and other 
local laboratories) to handle exercises that are too large 
for  the  CyTF  physical  footprint.    The  2016  IRP 
Exercise,  with  45  players,  required  the  use  of  CyTF 
plus two of the specialized conference rooms. 

The  IRP  participant’s  feedback  indicates  that  the 
addition  of  the  virtual  machine  environment  adds 
significantly  to  the  realism  of  the  exercise  when 
compared  with  previous  years’  tabletop  exercises.  
Each  player  was  assigned  his/her  own  virtual 
workstation  and  the  security  center  detection  and 
response analysts used most of the same security tools 
as  they  use  at  their  security  center  workstations.  
Unfortunately,  given 
the  CyTF 
environment and the necessary time constraints of pre-
exercise  player  support,  not  all  tools  the  analysts  use 
were  put  into  the  exercise  environment  and  some  that 
were  there  weren’t  configured  exactly  as  the  players 
preferred  them  to  be.    Even  with  these  limitations 
overall  player  feedback  regarding  the  realism  of  the 
environment  was  positive.    In  addition  to  security 
analysts  there  were  FAA  Information  Technology 
SMEs  that  were  provided  access  to  virtual  routers, 

the  newness  of 

Figure 4 - CyTF Cybersecurity Exercise Layout 

in  previous  years.    The  exercise  is  designed  to  be 
carried  by  three  teams:  Red,  Blue,  and  White  teams.  
The  Red  Team  is  the  intrusion  team;  it  has  partial  or 
full knowledge of the targeted system (usually virtual) 

firewalls  and  security  gateways  that  mimicked  their 
everyday environment. 

Some elaboration is in order concerning the complexity 
and  effort  inherent  when  first  introducing  a  virtual 

Page 6 of 8 

in 

the  exercise  due 

machine environment to what was formerly a table top 
exercise.    Since  this  was  also  the  first  exercise  for 
CyTF, both the physical and virtual environments were 
created  from  scratch.    Logistical  issues  are  to  be 
expected  when  hosting  an  exercise  for  the  first  time. 
The  physical  environment  required  workable  lighting 
and  HVAC  tuning  as  well  as  arrangements  for  player 
access and seating to accommodate the 50 plus players 
and  observers.    The  virtual  environment  required  not 
only  virtual  machines  and  network  devices  but  also 
commercial  and  FAA  software  applications  that    were 
installed  and  configured  according  to  current  FAA 
standards  to  have  the  same  look  and  feel  as  in  the 
player’s  own  environment.    The  large  number  of 
software  applications  required  the  coordination  of  the 
CyTF  with  FAA  partners  and  commercial  vendors.  
This  presented  a  scheduling  problem  in  that  partner 
SMEs  were  only  available  when  they  could  take  time 
away  from  their  normal  duties.    The  completion  of 
many  pieces  was  just-in-time  and  some  couldn’t  be 
included 
these  SME 
dependencies.  Commercial product licensing was also 
a major hurdle.  The number of temporary licenses and 
their  various  expiry  dates  became  a  significant  CM 
issue.  The amount of time to install, configure, test and 
verify the pieces and then test the overall environment 
meant that many temporary licenses were expired prior 
to  exercise  conduct.    Reuse  of  much  of  the  virtual 
environment for future exercises should alleviate some 
of  the  above  issues;  however,  licensing  and  support 
will remain an issue so long as temporary licenses are 
used.    Technical  issues  were  myriad  with  the  most 
salient  being 
the  virtual 
environment  architects  of  how  the  attack  scenarios 
would  operate  so  that  the  devices  that  were  being 
targeted  would  be  affected  as  the  scenario  team 
intended.    A  device  that  wasn’t  affected  according  to 
plan  meant  device  logs  wouldn’t provide the evidence 
that  may  be  needed  by  analysts  to  properly  diagnose 
the security event or to even detect the event.  Getting 
this  right  meant  many  meetings  that  consumed  a 
significant  amount  of  the  planning,  scenario,  and 
technical team members’ time (maybe 30%). 

the  understanding  by 

to 

CyTF capability # 6 has not yet been formally applied, 
but CyTF will be evaluating the current FAA processes 
that  apply  security  updates  to  Air  Transportation 
System  custom,  open  source  and commercial software 
in a more unified and systematic approach.  Changing 
and  increasing  cybersecurity  threats  may  have  the 
potential  to  exploit  vulnerabilities  in  data  flows, 
servers,  networks  and  security  processes  so  it  is 
increasingly  important  to  discover,  assess  and,  as 
necessary, either fix or mitigate security vulnerabilities. 
7.  Lessons Learned  

The initial design and implementation of the CyTF has 
been  a  rich  learning  process  and  experience.  One  key 
lesson  learned  was  the  need  to  connect  goals  and 
capabilities  to  the  mission  of  the  organization.    A 
research  and  development, 
test,  and  evaluation 
environment like the CyTF requires cross-organization 
collaboration and adequate funding (e.g., CyTF realized 
a  25%  differential  in  budgeting  costs)  to  succeed  that 
can be achieved only with executive-level sponsorship. 
While  primarily  a 
technical  environment,  CyTF 
management  elevated  their  technical  perspective  and 
connected the value of the CyTF to the FAA’s mission, 
to  address  cybersecurity  concerns  from  executives 
accountable and responsible for the FAA’s mission and 
strategy.   

a 

for 

test 

and 

strong  need 

identified 
research, 

Another  key  lesson  was that it is critical to design for 
scalability  and  adaptability  from  the  outset.    CyTF 
management 
a 
cybersecurity 
evaluation 
environment.   Once the initial CyTF environment was 
up  and  running,  there  were  multiple  stakeholder 
organizations  interested  in  learning  more  about  and 
using the CyTF.  A robust system engineering approach 
was  employed  (described  in  Section  6)  to  design  an 
environment  with 
limited  capabilities  and 
connections, but designed to evolve, scale and adapt as 
necessary.    From  a  technology  perspective,  great 
benefit  is  being  realized  in  the  use  of  virtualization 
technologies  that  provide  the  flexibility  to  scale,  re-
configure  and  adapt  the  CyTF  to  satisfy  multiple 
stakeholder needs. 

initial 

is 

to 

important 

research  and  development. 

leverage  current  cybersecurity 
It 
initiatives, 
the 
cybersecurity  threat  continues  to  evolve,  industry  and 
government 
responded  with 
significant 
that  can  be 
leveraged.    CyTF  is  collaborating  with  academia, 
government partners, and other government agencies. 

institutions 
research  and 

have 
initiatives 

  As 

it 

is  useful 

to  plan  for 

the  on-going 
Finally, 
management,  operations  and  maintenance  of 
the 
environment.  It is easy and rewarding to focus on the 
technical aspects of the environment, but the on-going 
management,  operations  and  maintenance  of 
the 
environment consume a significant amount of time and 
resources.    Managing  the  environment  includes  real 
estate,  acquisition,  procurement, 
funding,  vendor 
management, and visitor management activities, among 
others. 
Conclusion  
The  initial  and  current  CyTF  implementation  lays  a 
solid  foundation  to  address  the  cybersecurity  threat. 
CyTF implementation includes the local laboratory and 
network,  a  virtual  environment  simulating  parts  of  the 
Air  Transportation  System,  connectivity  to  replicated 

Page 7 of 8 

systems of the Air Transportation System, connectivity 
to  other  FAA  test  beds,  and  the  defensive  (blue), 
offensive (red), and orchestration (white) CyTF testing 
teams.  
The  initial  CyTF  implementation  is  incrementally 
evolving to replicate FAA NextGen Air Transportation 
System services in an independent and secure research 
and development environment.  The CyTF evolution is 
being driven and prioritized by the need to address the 
cybersecurity threat to the Air Transportation System.  

In  the  future  CyTF  will  provide  the  ability  to  validate 
the existence and magnitude of cybersecurity risks.  As 
the FAA develops models to identify threats and risks, 
CyTF provides the independent environment to validate 
the  findings  without  compromising  performance  and 
availability. 

CyTF  will  continue  and  expand  the  testing  and 
evaluation  of  cybersecurity  capabilities,  tools  and 
technologies 
to  secure  access,  applications  and 
services, data, networks, servers and end-points without 
compromising performance and availability.  

CyTF will be used to evaluate the security posture of an 
integrated portfolio of FAA Air Transportation System 
systems.    These  assessments  include  existing  and 
planned  cyber-profiles  of  the  subject/selected  systems, 
as well as aggregated “systems of systems” within the 
FAA construct; 

CyTF  will  continue  to  train  the  FAA  and  partner 
cybersecurity  workforce.  CyTF 
the 
environment  to  conduct  adequate  training  including 
processes, 
the 
cybersecurity threat landscape.  

technologies 

tools  and 

to  match 

provides 

in 

a 

realistic 

CyTF  will  provide  the  ability  to  conduct  penetration 
testing 
environment  without 
compromising  performance  and  availability.    CyTF 
provides  the  independent  environment  to  conduct 
penetration 
resembles  and 
evaluates the posture of the operational environment. 

faithfully 

testing 

that 

and 

CyTF  plans  to  continue  and  expand  cybersecurity 
exercises  to  test,  evaluate  and  improve  detection, 
response, 
and 
technologies.    CyTF  provides  the  environment  to 
expand  and  mature  detection,  response  and  recovery 
activities  to  consider  advanced  and  persistent  attacks 
from adversaries. 

processes, 

recovery 

tools 

to  expand 

the  portfolio  of 
CyTF  will  continue 
virtualized  systems 
laboratory  and 
network, as more components of the FAA NextGen Air 
Transportation 
virtualized 
implementations. 

the  CyTF 

System 

adopt 

in 

the 

future,  CyTF  will 

In 
include  a  Sensitive 
Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) to process 
sensitive  classified  information  that  would  include 
storage,  discussion  on, 
and/or  processing  of 
interconnected  data  feeds.    Development  of  a  SCIF 
would allow for the handling and sharing of classified 
information  and  information  connections  with  other 
federal partners. 

CyTF  provides  the  cybersecurity  research,  test  and 
evaluation  environment  to  address  the  continuing 
cybersecurity threat and to maintain a safe, secure and 
resilient FAA Air Transportation System. 
References 
[1] Federal Aviation Administration, January 30, 2015, 
NextGen  Cybersecurity  Test  Facility  (CyTF)  Concept 
of  Operations,  Version  1.0,  FAA  ANG-B31  WJHTC, 
NJ. 
[2] Federal Aviation Administration, January 30, 2015, 
NextGen  Cybersecurity  Test  Facility 
(CyTF) 
Functional  Analysis,  Version  1.0,  FAA  ANG-B31  
WJHTC, NJ. 
[3] Federal Aviation Administration, January 30, 2015, 
NextGen  Cybersecurity  Test  Facility 
(CyTF) 
Requirements,  Version  1.0,  FAA  ANG-B31  WJHTC, 
NJ.  
[4]  Federal  Aviation  Administration,  July  29,  2015, 
NextGen  Cybersecurity  Test  Facility 
(CyTF) 
Configuration  Management  Plan,  Version  1.3,  FAA 
ANG-B31 WJHTC, NJ.  
[5]  Fact  Sheet  -  En  Route  Automation  Modernization 
(ERAM), 
2015, 
http://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.cfm?n
ewsid=7714 
[6]  Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air 
Transportation 
2011, 
http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a535795.pdf. 

System,  Version 

April 

3.2, 

29, 

CyTF will provide the ability to assess and improve the 
resilience  of  information  systems.    CyTF  provides  the 
environment where resilience can be assessed, and new 
capabilities  can  be 
tested  and  evaluated  without 
compromising  the  performance  and  availability  of  the 
FAA Air Transportation System. 

Page 8 of 8 

