Short Paper: On the Awareness, Control and

Privacy of Shared Photo Metadata

Benjamin Henne, Maximilian Koch and Matthew Smith

Distributed Computing & Security Group,
Leibniz Universitt Hannover, Germany
{henne, smith}@dcsec.uni-hannover.de

Abstract. With the continuously rising number of shared photos, meta-
data is also increasingly shared, possibly with a huge and potentially un-
seen impact on the privacy of people. Users often relinquish the control
over their photos and the embedded metadata when uploading them.
Our results conﬁrm that the concept of metadata is still not commonly
known and even people who know about the concept are not aware of the
full extent of what is shared. In this work we present two solutions, one
to raise awareness about metadata in online photos and one to oﬀer a
user-friendly way to gain control over what and how metadata is shared.
We assess user interest in options ranging from deletion and modiﬁca-
tion to encryption and third party storage. We present results from a
lab study (n = 43) in which we evaluated user acceptance, feelings and
usability of the proposed solutions. Many of our participants expressed
the desire for user-friendly mechanisms to control the privacy of meta-
data. 33 % of them did not simply want to delete their metadata, but
preferred to use encryption to share, but nonetheless protect, their data.

1

Introduction

Due to the proliferation of broadband Internet and the wide-spread adoption
of mobile devices, the sharing of photos is nowadays booming more than ever:
In 2013 Facebook reported more than 350 million photo uploads per day, while
Instagram reports an average of 55 million photos per day today.

By uploading their photos, people partially relinquish the control over their
personal media. A central problem is that many people may not realize the loss
of control induced by sharing their ﬁles. Critically, only few people are aware
that most of their photos contain more information than the visual content
itself, i. e. the image metadata. Besides the visual content, the metadata can
amplify or even create threats to the users’ privacy. While in the early days
of digital imaging, metadata had to be manually — and thus consciously —
added to the pictures, current cameras are capable of embedding metadata like
GPS coordinates, a camera owner’s name or the position of faces into photos
automatically. Mobile apps even feature facial recognition that aims to support
tagging and might automatically tag individuals with names in the near future.
When these photos are uploaded, the metadata is often shared as well.

There has been a lot of work concerning the privacy and security of photos in
particular in the context of social media. Prior work mainly focused on privacy,
i. e. access control of images [8]. Additionally, speciﬁc metadata, like the location
of a photo [5] or people linked to photos [1], have been topics of research, but
mostly in the scope of services that grant access only to registered users or
“friends” [10]. Metadata in general, speciﬁcally metadata stored within image
ﬁles, has received far less attention. One fairly common approach is to simply
remove all metadata. However, since metadata can add value for users, this
radical solution is not suitable for all situations.

Our work aims at ﬁnding a way to maintain the metadata and the users’
privacy at the same time. One important aspect of this issue is that people must
ﬁrst become aware of the existence of this “invisible” metadata and thus hope-
fully gain the desire to use it, protect it or delete it. In this paper we present
a Chrome browser extension for raising awareness of metadata when uploading
content and while browsing. It also allows users to control what metadata is dis-
closed. We propose an integrated encryption-based approach to securely share
metadata online. Finally, we present results of a lab study (n = 43) on aware-
ness, control and the usability of our solution including a mock-up of metadata
encryption.

2 Metadata Problems in a Nutshell

Technical Complexity Photo metadata stored in ﬁles can contain an immense
amount of context information. Common metadata standards — such as Exif,
IPTC, and XMP — incorporate hundreds of diﬀerent tags. While many tags
address technical details, which are not so relevant for privacy, the scope of
privacy-related information should not be underestimated. For instance, the date
and time a photo was taken, the name of an image creator or camera owner, a
camera’s unique serial id, un-cropped preview images, descriptions, and textual
or coordinate-based location information can be included. Even person tags with
bounding boxes, as known from social networks services can be embedded today.
Besides the diversity of the information, its handling poses challenges as well:

– The sheer number of existing tags from diﬀerent standards and the lack of
any overall structure make the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc – in our case privacy-
related – information diﬃcult.

– The sets of tags supported by applications diﬀer signiﬁcantly, so people may

unintentionally use one that hides privacy-related information from them.

– Client applications and online services deal with metadata in a bewildering
number of ways [7]: Some strip metadata out entirely, others partially or not
at all. It is next to impossible for users to ﬁnd out how each service handles
their data without manually trying it out on their own.

– Metadata is stored in diﬀerent ways; i. e. in local databases, in image ﬁles,
in sidecar ﬁles, or in online services’ databases and people may not realize
the diﬀerences between respective privacy implications.

Rising adoption Due to the evolution of software and devices, the amount of
embedded metadata is rising rapidly. A dataset we crawled at Flickr provides
evidence for this trend. We crawled 200 k photos, one from each 100 k random
users/cameras and from another 100 k users taken by one of 76 popular smart-
phones. While the portion of geo-tagged images of the 100 k random users rose
from 1.5 % in 2006 to 5.1 % in 2012, its portion rose from 0 in 2006 to 39.3 % in
2012 and 42.9 % in 2013 in the subset of 100 k mobile photos. Additionally, we
found embedded person tags are now receiving early adoption: 5 % of the mobile
photos from 2013 contained unnamed person tags (bounding boxes only) and
0.1 ‰ named person tags. Most photos with unnamed person tags were taken
by iOS devices, which tag faces without names automatically since iOS 5.

User Awareness and Actions In a prior study (n = 414) [6] we analyzed user
behavior and perceptions of photo sharing including a section on metadata: In
that study 61.1 % of the participants indicated to know the concept of metadata.
Those indicating to know metadata made following statements: 29 % generally
do not know which additional information is contained in the photos they share;
58 % do not know what their social Web services do with photo metadata; and
about 27 % do not think about metadata at all when sharing images on the
Web. About 25 % of them do not manually add metadata to photos. About 6 %
remove all metadata before sharing, while additional 35 % remove it partially.

To Remove or Not to Remove Metadata The removal of metadata – either
by a service or the user – prevents privacy leaks but also removes information
that can be beneﬁcial as well. Metadata is a valuable tool to maintain control of
an increasing amount of photos. While most service providers are able to handle
big data very well, users are often overburdened keeping track of all their media.
In the latter case, metadata can help users to improve the handling of their
personal photos. Hence, it can be beneﬁcial to retain metadata in shared ﬁles.
It can also be desirable to allow others access to the metadata, however the user
should be able to consciously choose how and with whom this data is shared.
Users should not have to rely on service providers to remove or protect metadata
upon upload. Especially because it is impossible for them to check on what a
service does with the data.

Summary Image metadata introduces many beneﬁts, but it also creates di-
verse challenges for usability and privacy research. We identiﬁed two essential
objectives that we address in the remainder of this work:
1. Users have to become aware of the existence of metadata, for instance by
appropriate visualization [9]. Thus we have to ﬁnd usable technical solutions
that help raising the level of transparency and awareness of metadata in the
users’ ﬁles. This is true both for ﬁles already on the Web as well as ﬁles
currently being uploaded to the Web.

2. Users should have options beyond an all or nothing approach of removing
metadata or leaving it unchanged, so they can share metadata with whom
they choose without endangering their privacy.

3 Metadata Privacy Browser Extension

To address and study these objectives, we created a Chrome browser extension.
The base extension aims to raise awareness about privacy-relevant metadata in
shared photos, both for photos that users intend to upload, and for photos that
are already on the Web. The extension visualizes metadata with a privacy focus
and allows the modiﬁcation of metadata during upload.

Our extension handles the metadata standards Exif, IPTC, and XMP, based
on the Exiv2 C++ library that we integrated using Google Native Client. We
also extended the library to support latest in-ﬁle person tags as used by Google
Picasa, Windows Live Photo Gallery or the current iOS camera app.

While there are already browser extensions for the visualization of online
metadata in the Chrome Web Store, those are targeted mainly at photo en-
thusiasts who actively want to look at metadata. None of them has the goal of
informing users of potential privacy issues. Some even send images to a third
party web services to extract metadata, creating privacy issues of their own.

In contrast our extension indicates privacy-related metadata passively, thus
giving users a chance to see potential issues without having to consciously search
for themselves. Our metadata quick indicator icons overlay the actual image as
shown in Figure 1 and thus are right where the focus of the users is when they
are paying attention to the image. Maurer et al. have shown that placing security
indicators in-context signiﬁcantly improves their eﬀectiveness [11]. A user can
then click on the icons to open an information sidebar to get more information.

Quick indicator icons (size x 2)

personal references

location information
date and time
content description
other metadata
special Flickr metadata

no metadata

Fig. 1. Photo page at Flickr.com with Metadata Indicators and Information Sidebar

3.1 Visualization of Metadata

To visualize and raise awareness about privacy-relevant metadata, our extension
groups metadata in the sidebar corresponding to ﬁve categories: people, location,
date & time, content description, and other. For instance, the people category
includes person tags, names of photographers/artists or unique camera serial ids;
content description includes the image headline or keyword tags. Each group has
its own indicator icon. Wherever possible our extension visualizes the metadata:

Coordinate-based locations are shown on a map and bounding boxes of person
tags are drawn in a small preview image. For the power-users there is also a
button to see full metadata in all its technical glory. One particularly interesting
and potentially very harmful piece of metadata is also visualized: The preview
image, which is embedded by many cameras and software by default. An exam-
ple scenario in which this could lead to an unwanted privacy situation is if a
somewhat revealing photo is cropped to only show the torso or lower body, but
the preview still contains the head of person - thus identifying the person.

Since the perception of privacy certainly diﬀers between people, generations
and countries, we opted to structure presented metadata based on the kind of in-
formation instead of attempting to display the most privacy critical information
at the top. However, the extension allows assigning a privacy rating to metadata,
which then leads to that item being highlighted with a color of choice, such as
suggested by Shin et al. [13]. The assignment can be modiﬁed by the users ac-
cording to their own privacy perception. For the lab study we labeled a selection
of items as highly privacy-sensitive and colored them red to test the concept.

3.2 Control of Metadata

We believe unawareness is a major factor for the rare use of applications that
enable users to edit or remove metadata before upload. If people do not know
what is invisibly stored, they will not take any actions to deal with the issue.
However, it is very likely that usability also plays a big role. Most existing tools
require at least a moderate level of technical expertise. Additionally, users might
not be willing to invest the extra eﬀort of using such tools when their primary
goal is to share an image. Our hypothesis is that adding the visual information
and easy controls into the upload workﬂow will raise awareness of potential
privacy issues and also give the user easy to use tools to deal with the issues.
Thus, we implemented such features with our browser extension.

The prototypical implementation works with all basic HTML upload forms
based on re-submission with modiﬁed ﬁles. When a user uploads a photo via
the form, the extension engages in the form submission. An overlay as shown in
Figure 2 appears, and the metadata of all images selected in the ﬁle input can
be reviewed. The user additionally can modify or remove it from the ﬁles.

4 Protecting Metadata

Now that we are able to make people aware of metadata they are about to
upload, we need to give them tools to protect that data. As shown above the
upload sidebar can be used to easily delete metadata. However, metadata can be
useful and it would be desirable to be able to use it without endangering one’s
privacy by protecting it from unauthorized and unwanted parties.

In-File Encryption of Metadata One solution for securing metadata would
be the encryption of the data in the ﬁles. However, this creates several challenges
for current metadata standards: Since XMP bases on RDF/XML, we could in

Editing buttons

explain content

edit content

remove metatag

Fig. 2. Upload sidebar allows modiﬁcation
before ﬁnal submission

Fig. 3. Upload sidebar with option to
store metadata encryptedly — multiple
ﬁle upload with two photos

principle extend it with secure encryption and even digital signatures. In con-
trast, the most common Exif and IPTC data is in binary format with restrictions
to data length and types. In this case it is not possible to store data in encrypted
form without violating the standards or storing additional data somewhere else
in the ﬁles. When storing additional encryption data in ﬁles, it would be hard
to keep imaging software from removing it.

Metadata Stores For online photo sharing, we propose the use of external
metadata storage services (metadata stores) for two reasons: First, storing meta-
data in such a service allows users to maintain and share metadata even for
images stored at services like Facebook, which strip oﬀ the valuable data in
general. Second and related to privacy, the separate storage of metadata allows
the implementation of security mechanisms speciﬁcally for metadata, while also
enabling users to secure images and metadata diﬀerently. Data splitting allows
much more ﬂexibility for access control as any sharing services allows today [7].
To investigate the idea of metadata stores, we implemented an exemplary
test scenario based on Flickr. However, a similar app could be implemented
for other services that provide a public API. The Flickr app enables users to
upload photos to their photostream. When a user uploads an image with the
web app, the user can modify metadata as described before. Finally, the user
can choose to upload metadata in the image to Flickr or only separately to the
metadata store. When browsing the image, the extension loads metadata from
the metadata store and shows them in merged form.

Metadata Encryption So as not to create a privacy problem by storing meta-
data in plain text the data needs to be encrypted so that the store and other
unauthorized parties cannot access it. Storing metadata at a service makes en-

cryption easier: It is possible to encrypt the metadata without the restrictions
discussed before. As a ﬁrst step, we propose encrypting all metadata en bloc,
since encrypting separate parts creates additional usability challenges.

The big crux with most encryption solutions is that key management cre-
ates so many usability problems that users do not bother to use encryption
or can’t use it correctly [12]. For our use case the Conﬁdentiality as a Service
(CaaS) paradigm proposed by Fahl et al. [3] would be applicable to encrypt
stored metadata. Its usability has already been evaluated in the context of Face-
book messaging [4]. CaaS removes the need for user-based key management by
splitting the trust between a service provider and the CaaS provider. Using
commutative layers of symmetric encryption, neither the CaaS provider nor the
metadata store gets access to plain metadata. Applying Caas-encryption, a user
additionally chooses the sharing audience and enters his CaaS password when
uploading. If the audience is public the metadata is uploaded unencryptedly.
Otherwise the user selects contacts from his friends list and thus deﬁnes the
ACL for CaaS-encryption. When selecting a group like family or friends, every
user in the group is added. To prevent pre-binding attacks only users can be
added who are already registered with the CaaS. Once the metadata has been
encrypted by the CaaS provider, it is uploaded to the store. When someone is
browsing a photo for which metadata was escrowed in a store, the extension
loads the metadata. In the case of the metadata being encrypted and the user
is on the recipients lists, the extension asks for the user’s CaaS password and
decrypts the data.

5 User study

To assess user beneﬁts and the usability of the proposed browser extension, we
conducted a lab study. We invited students from our university mailing list for
study participation. 62 people ﬁlled out the online survey we used to outline our
study, of which 43 attended and completed the lab study without any issues.
The participants received a compensation of e 5. 62.8 % of the participants were
female and 37.2 % were male. Their average age was 24±4. The participants were
guided by a rough task description and answered 22 questions in a paper survey
while completing their tasks.

Since we were mainly looking for feedback on the usability of our solution and
the amount of interest the new features could illicit, we opted to openly state
what we were attempting to study. Thus, we brieﬂy explained that we want to
examine two new privacy features of the web browser Chrome: the possibility to
modify or delete metadata while uploading photos and a metadata viewer with
metadata indicator icons. We did not mention that we are the authors of the
extension, but rather portrayed it as new browser features.

Before our participants started their tasks, we asked them how much they
think about if, where, and how they disclose personal information on the Web.
On the 5-point scale from (1) not at all to (5) very much, they answered with
a mean and mode value of 4 (sd = 0.9) with 9 % of answers being in the lower
two items. Additionally, we asked them to rate their feeling of control of what

they disclose about themselves when sharing photos on the Web. On the 5-point
scale from (1) not at all to (5) absolutely they reported their feeling about control
with a mean value of 2.7 (sd = 1) with 20 % in the upper two items. The answers
showed a clear feeling of lack of control that we try to address with our work.

5.1 Awareness and Control at Photo Upload

In the ﬁrst task the participants were instructed to upload ﬁve photos at a
basic photo-sharing service: One image without metadata and four containing
diﬀerent metadata including location data, (un)named person tags, a camera
owner’s name, a camera serial id and technical details. The visual content and
location had slight relation to our university and students’ life.

After the participants had encountered the upload dialog and the metadata
for the ﬁrst time, we asked them if they knew that the information just visu-
alized by the browser was stored in (their) photos. 19 % of them answered no;
23 % answered yes. 58 % of them stated that they knew that some metadata is
embedded, but did not know which kind of data is stored. Additionally, 20 %
of those answering with yes wondered about some kind of data being embedded
later on in the study. This emphasizes that even if people know about meta-
data in general, most people probably do not know what is really embedded and
shared with ﬁles.

After all uploads we asked our participants how much the new feature im-
proved their awareness about what is shared with their photos. On a 5-point
scale from (1) not at all to (5) very much they answered with a mean value of
4.5, with 69 % answering very much. This is an encouraging result. When we
asked the same question about control of what is shared, participants answered
with a mean value of 4.3 with 55 % of participants having chosen the top answer.
Only a single participant stated in a comment that he still does not feel that he
has an overview of what exactly he shares on the Web. However, a large majority
of our participants stated that the new feature increased awareness and control
of shared data.

During this task overall 11 participants selectively deleted metadata of a
mean of 2.4 photos; 15 participants used the delete all button for other photos
(mean 2.5 photos), while 9 of them ﬁrst deleted selectively, but deleted all embed-
ded metadata in the end. When we asked the participants in the debrieﬁng if and
why they removed metadata in this task (42 % of them aﬃrmed deletion), some
explained that they had not removed metadata because it was only a study or
not their own photos. Interestingly, a participant reported to have deleted meta-
data for the same reason. She stated that she did not want to disclose data of
other people, even though she did not know them.

We also investigated ﬁrst contact perception and usability. After the par-
ticipants had used the upload feature for the ﬁrst time, we asked them if they
intuitively understood the new functionality. On a 5-point scale from (1) not at
all to (5) absolutely, they answered with a mean score of 3.8 (sd = 1.1).

Using the system usability scale (SUS) score [2], participants rated the upload

feature with 73.5 of 100 points, which indicates a good usability.

We questioned our participants how they perceived the integration of the
metadata modiﬁcation dialog in the upload process. On the 5-point scale from (1)
unfunctional/obstructive to (5) very functional/very good, they answered with a
mean value of 4.3 with 58% in the top item and only 5 % in the lower two items.
When asking how often they would like to use the new features at home using
the 5-point scale from (1) never to (5) always with (3) as from time to time, they
answered with a mean value of 4.2 (sd = 1, mode = 5) in case of the visualization
of uploaded metadata. Concerning the possibility of removing metadata, they
answered with a mean value of 4 (sd = 1, mode = 5). In contrast, the mean answer
of 3.7 (sd = 1.1, mode = 4) was given in case of the modiﬁcation of metadata.
Participants signiﬁcantly preferred viewing (Wilcoxon test: Z = −3, p < .05)
and visibly preferred deletion (Z = −1.7, p = .08) to changing values. When
asked for missing features, some participants requested easier removal of groups
of metadata, or a default option to delete all metadata on upload. However,
others asked for the ability to add metadata (namely person tags, location, and
copyright information). Finally, one participant asked for the option to encrypt
metadata in ﬁles.

5.2 Awareness of Metadata on the Web

In the second task participants started to browse on a prepared web page showing
some public images with links to source pages to allow the images to be viewed
in their original context. The images contained all kinds of metadata discussed
before including an example of a face cropped in the image, but with the complete
preview embedded. In addition, they could browse the Flickr page of recent
iPhone 4S uploads and another public photo-sharing community that preserves
metadata. Participants were free to decide where they browse and could choose
when to proceed with the questionnaire. On average they visited 3 external
pages and viewed the metadata details of 4 photos over a timespan of roughly 5
minutes before going on to the questionnaire.

When we asked them how helpful they perceived the indicator icons that
show what information is stored in the images, participants answered with a
mean value of 4.1 (sd = 1.1, mode = 5) on the 5-point scale from (1) not at all
helpful to (5) very helpful with 9 % of answers in the bottom two items. We also
asked how much the icons annoy them during browsing using the scale from (1)
not at all annoying to (5) very annoying. They responded to this question with
a mean value of 1.5 (sd = 0.7) with only one answer in the upper two items. Most
of the participants perceived the indicators as helpful to very helpful and hardly
anyone felt annoyed. However, both these values must taken in the context of
the task focus participants had. Particularly the annoyance question will have
to be re-evaluated in a ﬁeld study.

Since the sidebar includes diﬀerent aspects to improve the understanding of
information, we asked our participants how they perceived those aspects using
the 5-point scale from (1) useless to (5) very helpful with (3) as neutral. In case
of grouping data, showing very private data with red background, visualizing
locations on a map and the detailed view of all metadata the participants an-

swered with a mean score of 4.1 (sd = 1, mode = 5). In case of person tag previews
showing names when hovering over bounding boxes, the average score was 3.9
(sd = 1, mode = 4), and in case of tag descriptions the average answer was 3.8
(sd = 1.2, mode = 5). So, none of the features were regarded as useless.

To assess the awareness gain based on the metadata visualization, we asked
our participants how eﬀectively the new feature improves their awareness of what
is embedded in photos that they and others shared. On the 5-point scale from
(1) not at all to (5) very eﬀectively participants answered with the mean value
of 4.6 (sd = 0.8, mode = 5), indicating an appreciable improvement.

When we asked them how often they would like to use the new visualization
features at home using the 5-point scale from (1) never to (5) always with (3) as
from time to time, over 60 % answered in the top two items and no one answered
never. Our participants slightly preferred (Wilcoxon test: Z = 1.7, p = .09) using
metadata indicators on the average with a mean value of 4.2 (sd = 0.9, mode = 5)
to showing details in the sidebar with a mean value of 4 (sd = 1, mode ={4, 5}).
Based on the SUS score, participants rated the visualizations feature’s us-

ability with 76.9 of 100 points, which indicates a good usability.

5.3 Metadata Privacy and Usefulness

In the last task of the study the participants were instructed to upload one
of the initial photos again. To test whether users would be able to use the
proposed encryption mechanisms and to a small extent also test whether they
would be interested in it, the corresponding upload page was extended to support
storing metadata in a pre-conﬁgured metadata store. On this upload page our
mock-up of encryption was automatically enabled. When uploading a photo,
participants now were presented two buttons in the sidebar: Continue upload
and Continue upload; encrypt metadata as shown in Figure 3. When selecting
encryption, metadata was removed from the image ﬁle and stored in the service.
On submission the user was asked for the sharing audience corresponding to
Flickr groups family, friends, only me, and some people from the user’s role-
playing contact list. Afterwards users had to enter their encryption password and
the image was uploaded. Viewing the uploaded image, the extension recognized
the image and asked for password once to decrypt the metadata from the store.
While the participants were primed to upload an image, we did not elaborate
on the encryption. We only provided them a password in the task description
with which they could encrypt their metadata if they want. We did not give them
any task which explicitly required them to do that though. When executing the
task, 56 % of the participants encrypted metadata of an uploaded image.

In the survey we asked them whether they consider metadata as (1) a threat
to privacy or as (5) useful and meaningful information on a 5-point scale. In the
case of sharing photos on the Web, they stated that they consider it as a threat
with a mean rating of 1.7 (sd = 1, mode = 1). When sharing photos with single
persons for instance via email, they rated metadata to be more meaningful with
a mean value of 3.9 (sd = 1, mode = 4). For private use, they rated it with a
mean value of 4.6 (sd = 0.9) to be meaningful and useful data.

Finally, we asked our participants to rank diﬀerent ways to secure metadata
sharing and hence preserve their privacy. In their answers, 40 % of the partici-
pants indicated to mostly prefer the removal of all metadata, while 33 % stated
to prefer encryption to restrict access to it. We found this to be surprising. Con-
sidering how unpopular email encryption is and the fact that we only mentioned
the possibility to use encryption but did not task them to use it, we did not
expect so many participants to list this as their preferred option. 26 % prefer to
share metadata publicly after selectively removing some information and only
one participant stated he wanted to share the metadata completely as is the cur-
rent standard. On the second rank, 53 % of the participants chose the selective
removal; 23 % encryption; and 19 % the complete removal. Sharing metadata
as it is was the last choice for 86 % of participants. Participants’ answers show
an appreciable willingness to encrypt metadata, which allows securing it while
retaining the data for a restricted audience.

5.4 Debrieﬁng and Summary

In the debrieﬁng of the study, we asked the participants what they had learned
by using the extended browser and if they thought this would have any eﬀect on
their thinking or future behavior. 88 % of our participants answered aﬃrmatively.
About one quarter of them stated that they will (try to) think about metadata
or even modify it when sharing photos in the future, while others stated that
they are now more aware about the topic after having seen metadata in the
wild. This shows that once informed about the existence of metadata there
is a desire for change. Thus, it should be our goal to raise awareness in the
wild and give users tools with which to control and protect their metadata.
More than 10 % commented that they underestimated the amount and kind of
stored information. Even people who thought that they know what is stored
were surprised about some data like embedded previews or in-ﬁle person tags.

Before we could debrief them on the fact that the extension was developed
by us about one quarter of the participants asked when or where they could
get the browser with the new features. Even after they were informed that the
extension is still a prototype some were interested in getting an early version.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work we presented an extension for the Google Chrome web browser that
aims to assist users in seeing and controlling photo metadata. Our lab study
showed that users reacted very positively to the capability of seeing and being
able to control the metadata they upload. The usability evaluation received very
good results and set the stage for the next phase of our research. In this study
we did not obfuscate the fact that we were studying the visualization and control
of metadata. Thus, we could only study the usability of our approach and not
the awareness and desire raising eﬀect this technology can have in the wild.
The next step in our work is to conduct a ﬁeld study to see how eﬀective the
upload window, the metadata indicators and sidebar are without any priming

or task focus. Based on a mock-up implementation of the encryption service we
proposed, our study’s results showed that one third of our participants opted for
the encryption approach. This surprising result also bears further research.

References

1. Besmer, A., Richter Lipford, H.: Moving beyond untagging: photo privacy in a
tagged world. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. pp. 1563–1572. CHI ’10, ACM (2010)

2. Brooke, J.: SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale. In: Jordan, P.W., Weerdmeester,
B., Thomas, A., Mclelland, I.L. (eds.) Usability evaluation in industry. Taylor and
Francis, London (1996)

3. Fahl, S., Harbach, M., Muders, T., Smith, M.: Conﬁdentiality as a service – usable
security for the cloud. In: Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Commu-
nications (TrustCom), 2012 IEEE 11th Int’l. Conference on. pp. 153–162 (2012)

4. Fahl, S., Harbach, M., Muders, T., Smith, M., Sander, U.: Helping johnny 2.0 to
encrypt his facebook conversations. In: Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security. pp. 11:1–11:17. SOUPS ’12, ACM (2012)

5. Friedland, G., Sommer, R.: Cybercasing the joint: on the privacy implications
of geo-tagging. In: Proceedings of the 5th USENIX conference on Hot topics in
security. pp. 1–8. HotSec’10, USENIX Association (2010)

6. Henne, B., Smith, M.: Awareness about photos on the web and how privacy-
privacy-tradeoﬀs could help. In: Adams, A.A., Brenner, M., Smith, M. (eds.) FC
2013 Workshops, USEC and WAHC 2013, Revised Selected Papers, LNCS, vol.
7862, pp. 131–148. Springer (2013)

7. Henne, B., Szongott, C., Smith, M.: Snapme if you can: privacy threats of other
peoples’ geo-tagged media and what we can do about it. In: Proceedings of the
sixth ACM conference on Security and privacy in wireless and mobile networks.
pp. 95–106. WiSec ’13, ACM (2013)

8. Klemperer, P., Liang, Y., Mazurek, M., Sleeper, M., Ur, B., Bauer, L., Cranor,
L.F., Gupta, N., Reiter, M.: Tag, you can see it!: using tags for access control in
photo sharing. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. pp. 377–386. CHI ’12, ACM (2012)

9. Mahmood, S., Desmedt, Y.: Usable Privacy by Visual and Interactive Control of
Information Flow. In: Christianson, B., Malcolm, J., Stajano, F., Anderson, J.
(eds.) Security Protocols XX. LNCS, vol. 7622, pp. 181–188. Springer (2012)

10. Mahmood, S., Desmedt, Y.: Poster: preliminary analysis of google+’s privacy. In:
Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer and communications secu-
rity. pp. 809–812. CCS ’11, ACM (2011)

11. Maurer, M.E., De Luca, A., Kempe, S.: Using data type based security alert dialogs
to raise online security awareness. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security. pp. 2:1–2:13. SOUPS ’11, ACM (2011)

12. Sheng, S., Broderick, L., Koranda, C.A., Hyland, J.J.: Why johnny still can’t
encrypt: evaluating the usability of email encryption software. In: Symposium On
Usable Privacy and Security (2006)

13. Shin, D., Lopes, R.: An empirical study of visual security cues to prevent the
SSLstripping attack. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Computer Security Applica-
tions Conference pp. 287–296 (2011)

