The Ghosts of Banking Past: Empirical Analysis

of Closed Bank Websites

Tyler Moore1 and Richard Clayton2

1 Computer Science and Engineering Department,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA

tylerm@smu.edu

2 Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK

richard.clayton@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract. We study what happens to the domains used by US banks
for their customer-facing websites when the bank is shut down or merges
with another institution. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC) publishes detailed statistical data about the many thousands of
US banks, including their website URLs. We extracted details of the 3 181
banks that have closed their doors since 2003 and determined the fate of
2 302 domain names they are known to have used. We found that 47% are
still owned by a banking institution but that 33% have passed into the
hands of people who are exploiting the residual good reputation attached
to the domain by hosting adverts, distributing malware or carrying out
search engine optimization (SEO) activities. We map out the lifecycle
of domain usage after the original institution no longer requires it as
their main customer contact point – and explain our ﬁndings from an
economic perspective. We present logistic regressions that help explain
some of reasons why closed bank domains are let go, as well as why
others choose to repurpose them. For instance, we ﬁnd that smaller and
troubled banks are more likely to lose control of their domains, and
that the domains from bigger banks are more likely to be repurposed
by others. We draw attention to other classes of domain that are best
kept oﬀ the open market lest old botnets be reviviﬁed or other forms of
criminality be resurrected. We end by exploring what the public policy
options might be that would protect us all from ghost domains that are
no longer being looked after by their original registrants.

1

Introduction

Many countries have just a handful of High Street banks, each with branches
nationwide. The USA is an exception, in that although there are a number of
national or regional brands, there are still many local banks – with perhaps
only one branch, or just a couple more in neighboring towns. The US banking
sector is underpinned by a government promise that should a bank fail then
depositors will get their money back (up to $250,000). The databases created by
the administration of this scheme make it relatively straightforward to ﬁnd data

2

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

about US banks – as of 31 March 2013 there were 7 019 institutions that were
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).

In Spring 2013 we came across what appeared to be a legitimate website,
albeit of somewhat dated design, for the Mid Valley Bank, Corning, California,
USA. What caught our eye was that on their “News” page they had several
stories which appeared to be ‘astroturﬁng’ puﬀs for rare earth metal investments,
gold sales and reverse mortgages. Alongside this they had news stories from 2010
on their quarterly ﬁnancial results, but when we clicked through the pages were
dated 2013. In fact, not only were they dated 2013 but some stories even referred
to events that would occur several months into the future.

We used a search engine and found Mid Valley Bank listed on white pages
websites such as Yelp, Merchant Circle and MapQuest. However we also found
links to the FDIC website. This explained that on 23 January 2004 the bank was
“merged without assistance” into PremierWest Bank. This is presumably why
when we followed another link on the ﬁrst page of the search results to lendio.
com (a company founded in 2006 that puts businesses in touch with lenders)
their webpage about the Mid Valley Bank marks the details as “not veriﬁed”.

Examining the history of the midvalleybank.com domain we ﬁnd that it was
ﬁrst registered on 19 July 1996 by the Mid Valley Bank. By 22 February 2008 it
was registered in the name of an employee of PremierWest Bank but the domain
was allowed to expire on 18 July 2009. It was re-registered on 3 October 2009
by a resident of Novokuznetsk, Russia, a town 500km SE of Novosibirsk and 800
km from the Mongolian border. On 8 October 2010 the registration changed to a
proxy service which suggests that its ownership may have changed hands again.
It remains registered under a proxy service to the present time.

The Internet Archive www.archive.org records that the current website de-
sign was put in place sometime between June 2009 and 10 October 2010 – at
which time the forward looking statements about ﬁnancial results now present
were dated consistently with the reporting of then recent events. However, the
archive shows that identical reports (with exactly the same proﬁt/loss/asset
numbers) were posted by the real bank in 2002, and the current website design
was in use by the real bank between October 2000 and July 2004, after which a
redirection page (to premierwestbank.com) was present.

Thus we had determined that one closed bank’s website had come back to life
with somewhat dubious content. We therefore decided to ascertain how common
such resurrections are and then identify how the public might best be protected
when domains with a substantial reputation become surplus to requirements.

In Section 2 we discuss the FDIC banking database and how it comes to
contain banking domain names. In Section 3 we examine the current state of
the domain names of 2 393 of the banks that have merged or been shut down
since July 2003. We propose a ‘life cycle’ for banking domains, with a common
progression from each stage of reuse to the next, explaining how a sequence of
decisions leads to our observed results. We ﬁnd that large banks (as measured
by total deposits) are more likely to retain old domains, and that non-banks
are nearly always responsible for the resurrection of expired bank domains. We

The Ghosts of Banking Past

3

describe methods for identifying when non-banks impersonate banks on domains
from closed banks and for locating at-risk domains that may soon fall out of bank
control. In Section 4 we discuss policy options for proactively dealing with the
domains of closed banks in order to protect the public interest. We conclude
by discussing related work in Section 5 and by summarizing our ﬁndings in
Section 6.

2 Data Collection and Analysis Methodology

We ﬁrst describe our approach to identifying the ‘ghost’ websites associated with
closed banks in Section 2.1. We then describe in Section 2.2 a methodology for
classifying how the websites are being used and whether or not the bank still
retains control over the domains.

2.1 FDIC Data Collection

Franklin D. Roosevelt was inaugurated as US President on 4 March 1933 amidst
a banking crisis – conﬁdence had evaporated, investors were withdrawing their
funds, and banks were closing their doors because they did not have the currency
to fund withdrawals. FDR declared a banking holiday on 6 March 1933 and banks
were only allowed to reopen once federal inspectors had declared them sound and
that they had access to suﬃcient capital. This restored conﬁdence and investors
queued up again to return their funds to the banks that reopened.

This system of federal investor deposit insurance was regularized by the
Banking Act of June 1933 which created the Federal Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration (FDIC). The FDIC examines and supervises US banks, including state
banks. Should a bank fail then the FDIC will manage it in receivership, and it
also has a rˆole in ensuring mergers occur so as to prevent a bank from failing.

The FDIC provides an online database in which are recorded all of the in-
stitutions that it has supervised, including those which no longer exist, having
merged or failed.1 This database is populated from the quarterly questionnaires
that all supervised banks must complete, and one of the optional questions re-
quests the URL of the bank’s website. In other words the FDIC has a database
that records a substantial number of domains currently being used by US banks
and – key to the present study it often records the domains being used by banks
at the point at which they became, in the FDIC’s jargon, “inactive”.

We fetched a copy of the FDIC’s database for 6 June 2013 and extracted from
this the website URLs for banks that had closed on or after 1 July 2003 (i.e.
over a period of almost ten years). We found that quite a number of these closed
banks did not have a website URL entry. However, we located a third-party
website (http://banks.com-guide.org) which appears to have populated its
pages using FDIC data from 2007 – and this provided us a large number of
website URLs that the current FDIC database was missing.

1 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Institution Directory: http://www2.fdic.

gov/idasp/warp_download_all.asp

4

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

In total, the FDIC database lists 3 181 banks that were merged or closed
between 1 July 2003 and 6 June 2013 and, by the means just described, we were
eventually able to obtain 2 302 URLs for their websites matching 2 393 banks
(75% of the total).2

2.2 Methodology for Identifying Domain Usage

Following an initial sampling of websites, we identiﬁed the following categories
for how closed bank domains are used:

1. operable bank-held website (old bank, redirect, or interstitial page);
2. domain parking pages with syndicated advertisements;
3. websites used to distribute malware;
4. other forms of reuse (e.g., blog spam, black-hat search-engine optimization);
5. inoperable websites (e.g., blank pages, misconﬁgured websites);
6. inactive domains (unregistered, or not resolving).

We visited all the closed banks’ domains programmatically using a Selenium
Firefox client, capturing a screenshot of the rendered website. We manually
inspected each screenshot and assigned the domains to the appropriate category,
a tedious but straightforward task. We identiﬁed malware-distributing websites
by observing a blocking page set by the university ﬁrewall indicating that the
website appears in a malware blacklist. We did not verify that the website still
continued to distribute malware.

Inactive domains were identiﬁed by DNS lookup failures. WHOIS information

was gathered for all domains and parsed using the DeftWhois Perl package.3

We also distinguished between domains still held by banks and those con-
trolled by others. We used the following heuristics to conﬁrm that a bank controls
the domain:

1. any website whose screenshot is categorized as a bank and the domain has

been continuously registered since before the bank closed;

2. any website that redirects to a currently open bank website URL that ap-

pears in the FDIC list;

3. any domain with WHOIS information indicating ownership by a bank.

Any domain satisfying one of these requirements is classiﬁed as being bank-
held. This enables us to identify which inoperable domains are controlled by
banks as opposed to third parties.

The ﬁrst heuristic also enables us to identify the rare but insidious practice
of impersonating a bank. Some websites look like a bank, but are in fact run
by someone other than a bank. We can identify this by looking for bank-like
websites where the domain dates from after the associated bank has already
closed. In these cases, the closed bank allowed the domain registration to lapse,
after which it is re-registered by a non-bank entity.

2 The reason that we found fewer distinct URLs than banks is that some closed banks

used the same web address (most likely as a result of merging).

3 WHOIS Data Extracted from Templates: http://www.deft-whois.org

The Ghosts of Banking Past

5

3 Empirical Analysis

We now discuss the data collected on ghost websites. First, in Section 3.1 we
break down the prevalence of diﬀerent forms of reuse. Then in Section 3.2 we
present evidence that domains often progress from relatively innocuous forms of
reuse to more insidious ones. In Section 3.3 we investigate how diﬀerent charac-
teristics such as bank size aﬀect the likelihood of banks retaining control over
domains. We then identify instances of bank impersonation on ghost domains
in Section 3.4, followed by ﬁnding at-risk domains currently held by banks but
susceptible to changing hands in Section 3.5.

3.1 How Closed Bank Websites are Used

2 393 banks operated 2 302 distinct websites at the time they were closed. The
ﬁrst question one might ask of these orphaned website domains is who controls
them. Surprisingly, just 46% (1 059) of the domains are still held by banks. 45%
(1 030) are used by others, while 9% of domains (213) are unregistered.

Figure 1 shows how the domains are currently being used. 30% of the closed
bank domains are still used as bank websites, by redirecting to another bank’s
website, displaying an interstitial page, or hosting the old website. 37% of the
domains have registered owners but are functionally inoperable.

The most popular repurposing of bank domains is for websites displaying the
type of pay-per-click adverts typical of domain parking companies (426 domains,
18% of the total). Malware is distributed by 11 websites (0.5% of the total) and
110 domains (4.6%) have websites used for an assortment of other purposes.

Occasionally these domains are bought by legitimate services interested in
the address (e.g., the social technology ﬁrm Gab Online registered gab.com after
the Greater Atlantic Bank collapsed). More frequently, the new purpose bears
little resemblance to the original bank. For example, a few websites sell phar-
maceuticals or display pornographic content. Perhaps the most curious reuse is
bankoffriendship.com, which displays a trailer and cast information for the
German language ﬁlm “Nullstex”. This could be a symptom of dodgy search-
engine optimization, which is a frequent form of reuse.

3.2 The Lifecycle of Closed Bank Websites

Given the many uses for closed bank domains, we now investigate the extent to
which bank domains cycle through diﬀerent phases of usage over time. Figure 2
plots the fraction of domains still held by a bank against year of closure.

We start by noting that when the bank originally registered their domain
name they will have been able to choose to register for 1, 2, 5 or 10 years.4 Thus
when the bank closed it may have been several years until the next time at which

4 Some top level domains do not allow very long registration periods for domain names,

but .com, which dominated our results, certainly does.

6

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

Operable (bank−held)

Inoperable (bank−held)

Inoperable (non−bank)

Parking ads

Other reuse

Malware

Unregistered

Bank−held
Not bank−held

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

% of all closed bank websites

Fig. 1: Current use of domains from closed banks. Blue bars indicate bank-held
(46%), red bars indicates non-bank holders (45%) or unregistered (9%).

s
k
n
a
b

 
y
b

 

l

d
e
h

 
s
e

t
i
s
b
e
w

 
f

 

o
%

0
0
1

0
8

0
6

0
4

0
2

0

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Year of bank closure

Fig. 2: Fraction of closed banks whose domains are still owned by a bank, by
year of bank closure.

Operable (bank−held)

Inoperable (bank−held)

Inoperable (non−bank)

Parking ads

Other reuse

Malware

Unregistered

0

2

4

6

8

10

Years since bank closed

Fig. 3: Box plot of time since bank closed for diﬀerent website categories.

The Ghosts of Banking Past

7

a renewal decision had to be made. However, we found nothing in our data to
suggest that long term registrations obscure shorter-term behavior.

We do ﬁnd that the domains of recently closed banks are much more likely
to remain with a bank – 99% of domains for banks closed in 2013 and 82% of
domains for banks closed in 2012 remain under bank control. As time passes and
domain registration renewals must be authorized and funded, perhaps several
times, more domains fall out of the possession of a bank. The decline is steady,
falling from 58% for banks shut in 2011 to 29% for banks closed in 2003.

For those domains that fall into the hands of others, how are they used and
when does it happen? Figure 3 sheds some light. Domains that still point to banks
have been closed for just under 4 years (median). By contrast, domains now
used by parking companies have been closed for 5.5 years on average, with other
forms of reuse falling slightly behind at 6 years. The eleven websites distributing
malware belonged to banks that had closed 7.5 years prior on average, which is
a similar time to domains that are simply unregistered today.

We note that there is substantial variation in the delays observed for each
category. Some bank websites are abandoned and repurposed in less than a
year, while some banks have held onto domains for more than a decade. But the
median values do suggest that most abandoned domains are older, and they shift
from use by parking companies to more sinister forms of reuse as time passes.

But are these diﬀerences statistically signiﬁcant? The closure times are not
normally distributed, since they are bounded on the left by zero. We also con-
ﬁrmed this using a Q-Q plot against a normal distribution. Hence, we use non-
parametric tests to assess the diﬀerences in medians across categories.

We ﬁrst run a Kruskal-Wallis test checking for diﬀerences among median
2 value of 292.9.
values across all categories. This is highly signiﬁcant, with a χ
We therefore investigate pairwise diﬀerences in the closure times for each pair
of categories to identify which diﬀerences are in fact signiﬁcant. The results are
given in Table 1.

Not

registered

Malware Other Parking
adverts

reuse

Inoperable
(not bank)

Inoperable
(bank-held)

Malware
Other reuse
Parking adverts
Inop. (not bank)
Inop. (bank)
Operable (bank)

✖

✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✖

✖

✖

✱✱

●

✖

✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✱✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✱✱✱

✖

Table 1: Pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum tests comparing diﬀerences in median clo-
sure times for diﬀerent types of reuse. P-values are adjusted using the Holm
method. The diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant as follows. Legend: ✖: not
signiﬁcant, ● : p < 0.10, ✱: p < 0.05, ✱✱: p < 0.01, ✱✱✱: p < 10−6.

8

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

We can see that the diﬀerence in closure times between domains held by
banks that are still used for banking and all other categories is statistically
signiﬁcant, with the exception of inoperable domains held by banks. Domains
used to display adverts and other reuses are associated with banks that have
been closed signiﬁcantly longer than domains still serving as banks or those that
are now inoperable. However, unregistered domains have closed for the longest
periods, and the diﬀerence between unregistered and both parking and reuse is
statistically signiﬁcant.

3.3 Characteristics Aﬀecting Domain Reuse

We next examine whether certain attributes aﬀect the chances the domains will
fall from bank control. Characteristics studied include the time since closure,
bank size and the reason the bank closed (e.g., collapse or voluntary merger).
We ﬁrst present descriptive statistics and then construct logistic regressions to
more carefully identify factors that aﬀect domain reuse.

Descriptive Statistics Table 2 shows the prevalence of diﬀerent attributes
for domains controlled by banks compared to those which are not. Diﬀerences in
2 tests (those categories
proportion are checked for statistical signiﬁcance using χ
found to be signiﬁcant are indicated by + and − signs in the table).

535 bank domains have been allowed to expire at some time after the bank
closed. However, 326 of these have subsequently been ‘resurrected’, that is, re-
registered and a new creation date has been recorded in the WHOIS.

The ﬁrst grouping in Table 2 examines how resurrected domains are used.
Only 0.7% of bank-held domains have been resurrected, compared with 30%
of domains not held by banks. Once resurrected, very few domains lose their
registration again (only 2%). Thus, we can safely conclude that the vast majority
of domains abandoned by banks are no longer seen to be valuable for banking,
and that non-bank entities are most likely to resurrect an abandoned domain.

We can also examine if any characteristics of the bank itself are associated
with who ends up controlling the closed bank’s domain. Larger banks tend to
have greater IT resources, so they are less likely to inadvertently lose control
over domain names. Smaller banks may have fewer resources, but their domains
may also be less attractive for others to reuse since there would be less incoming
traﬃc and fewer links to the old content.

The second grouping of rows in Table 2 uses the reported total deposits at
closure as a measure of bank size. Indeed, large banks are more likely to hold
onto their domains. When smaller banks close, their domains are more likely to
be abandoned and end up unregistered than mid-sized bank domains.

Finally, we can examine the circumstances of why the bank closed to see
if this aﬀects how the domain is later used. Of the 2 394 closed banks, the vast
majority shut as a result of a merger or acquisition. 79% merged or were acquired
without requiring any ﬁnancial assistance from federal regulators, while another
18% did so with assistance. 71 banks, 7% of the total, collapsed and were closed

The Ghosts of Banking Past

9

Bank-held

Not bank-held

Unregistered

#

%

Diﬀ.? #

%

Diﬀ.? #

%

Diﬀ.?

Not resurrected
Resurrected

1 119 99.3% (+) 739 70.2% (−) 209 98.1%

8

0.7% (−) 314 29.8% (+)

4

1.9% (−)

Deposits < $100M
$100M < Dep. < $1Bn
Deposits > $1Bn

353
622 55.4%
148 13.2% (+)

31.4 (−) 365 34.5%
591 56.4%
8.7%

91

146 69.2% (+)
62 29.4% (−)
1.4% (−)

3

27

36

3.4%

8
12

3.8%
5.6% (−)

226 21.5% (+)
791 75.1%

2.4%
196 17.4%
80%
904

Collapsed
M/A with assistance
M/A without assistance
Table 2: Comparison of characteristics of closed banks to post-closure website
use. The ﬁrst grouping compares websites that are ‘resurrected’ (i.e., the do-
main’s creation date occurs after the bank closed) to those whose domains have
not expired after the bank closed. The second grouping measures bank size in
terms of deposits, and the third grouping examines why the bank closed (e.g.,
due to collapse, versus acquisition or merger made with or without federal as-
sistance). Diﬀerences in proportion that are statistically signiﬁcant at the 95%
2 test are indicated with a (+) or (−) sign.
conﬁdence interval according to a χ

193 90.6%

by the FDIC. Banks that are merged or acquired with federal assistance (i.e.,
they were in ﬁnancial trouble but not enough to lead to total collapse) are
disproportionately likely to see their domains fall into the hands of non-banks.
These domains are also less likely to be abandoned completely.

Logistic regressions We carry out two related logistic regressions to identify
factors that may lead to the abandonment and repurposing of bank websites by
others. In the ﬁrst regression, we create a binary response variable for whether
or not the bank relinquishes the domain. This includes domains that are used
by others as well as those that remain unregistered.

Our ﬁrst model takes the following form:

log

pabandoned

1 − pabandoned

= c0 +c1 log (Deposits) + c2 Troubled + c3 Years closed + ε

where the variables we examined were:

* Abandoned: Boolean response variable set to True if the bank no longer

controls the domain (i.e., it is unregistered or not bank-held).

* Deposits: Deposits held by the bank when closed (in thousands of dollars).
* Troubled: Boolean variable set to True if the bank collapsed or was merged

with FDIC assistance.

* Years closed: Years since the bank has closed.

Informed by the summary statistics just presented, we hypothesize that trou-
bled banks and smaller banks (as measured by deposits) are more likely to aban-

10

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

Regression 1

(Intercept)
log(Deposits)
Troubled
Years closed

coef.
0.58
-0.17
0.87
0.29

Odds Ratio
1.79
0.84
2.38
1.33

Response variable: Abandoned
95% conf. int.
Signiﬁcance
(0.90,3.63)
-
p ≪ 0.0001
(0.80,0.89)
p ≪ 0.0001
(1.90,2.98)
(1.29,1.39)
p ≪ 0.0001

Model ﬁt:

2 = 322.8, p ≪ 0.0001

χ

Regression 2

(Intercept)
log(Deposits)
Troubled
Years closed

coef.
-0.84
0.33
0.73
0.24

Odds Ratio
0.43
1.39
2.08
0.79

Response variable: Registered
Signiﬁcance
-
p ≪ 0.0001
p = 0.0151
p ≪ 0.0001

95% conf. int.
(0.13,1.38)
(1.27,1.53)
(1.18,3.86)
(0.73,0.85)

Model ﬁt:

2 = 120.7, p ≪ 0.0001

χ

Table 3: Tables of coeﬃcients for logistic regressions.

don domains. We also anticipate that as more time passes following a bank’s
closure, the associated domain becomes more likely to fall outside its control.

Indeed, as shown in Table 3 (top), each of these hypotheses are conﬁrmed.
Every doubling of the size of deposits at the closed bank reduces the odds that the
domain will be abandoned by 16%. For troubled banks, the odds of abandonment
are increased by 138%. Finally, each additional year that the bank has been
closed increases the odds that the domain will be abandoned by 33%.

We are also interested in ﬁnding out which domains that have been aban-
doned get repurposed by others. Consequently, we performed a second logistic
regression on the 1 265 domains that banks no longer control:

log

pregistered

1 − pregistered

= c0 +c1 log (Deposits) + c2 Troubled + c3 Years closed + ε

For this regression, the binary response variable Registered is simply set to
True if the abandoned domain is still registered.

Once again, as shown in Table 3 (bottom), each of the explanatory vari-
ables are statistically signiﬁcant. However, this time the eﬀects are diﬀerent. In
particular, the abandoned domains associated with closed banks having greater
deposits are more likely to remain registered. As each year passes, the odds that
a website outside of bank control will remain registered falls by 21%. Finally,
abandoned domains of troubled banks face double the odds that they will be
registered by others.

The Ghosts of Banking Past

11

3.4 Identifying Bank Impersonation

While quite rare, an especially harmful form of closed bank domain reuse is to
set up webpages that look like banks but are not in fact banks. We identiﬁed
such websites by more closely inspecting all the resurrected domains that we had
classiﬁed as being banks to determine whether their content was branded for an
appropriate banking entity.

In all, we found just ﬁve dubious domains. Three (rockbridgebank.com,
securitystatebank.net and the aforementioned midvalleybank.com) serve
copies of the old bank website but have had links to other websites added, likely
as part of some blackhat search-engine optimization scheme.

One bank, plazabank.com, is a false positive. After Plaza Bank of Texas
was acquired, the address plazabank.com was allowed to expire. Plaza Bank of
California and Nevada, which goes by the address plazabank.net according to
the FDIC, resurrected plazabank.com, which now shows a copy of the content
appearing on plazabank.net.

The ﬁfth website, townecenterbank.com, is more of a head-scratcher. Ac-
cording to the WHOIS information, townecenterbank.com is registered to “Do-
main Listing Agent” and now redirects to towncenterbank.net, which is reg-
istered to “Town Center Bank”. It is plausible that the unrelated Town Center
Bank took over the domain after Towne Center Bank folded.

3.5 Identifying At-Risk Bank Websites

While the analysis so far has focused on the ways in which expired bank domains
are already being reused, we can also identify at-risk websites that are more likely
to fall from bank control in the future.

We consider a bank-controlled website to be at-risk if, according to the
WHOIS record, the domain has not been updated since before the bank closed
but has yet to expire. In this circumstance, the bank has not yet had to make a
decision whether or not to renew the domain, if indeed they are fully aware that
the domain is theirs to renew.

Of the 1 127 bank-controlled websites, 157 are at-risk of falling out of bank
control. Figure 4 shows when the registration for these websites is set to expire.
Between 30 and 40 websites will expire annually over the next three years. We
anticipate that as further banks close, the number for the years 2016 and beyond
will rise to the level of 2013–2015.

How many at-risk websites do we anticipate will fall from bank control? We
know that the 970 websites for closed banks have been updated and remain held
by banks, compared to 1 266 websites that banks no longer control. If the same
fraction holds for the 157 at-risk domains that have not yet faced the option to
renew, then we would expect that without any change in the approach taken by
the banks then 57% of the at-risk domains will be taken over by non-banks.

We next discuss the policy options that might be considered for dealing with

these and future at-risk domains.

12

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

n
o

i
t

a
r
i
p
x
e

 
f

o

 
r
a
e
Y

40

30

20

10

0

3
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

5
1
0
2

6
1
0
2

7
1
0
2

8
1
0
2

9
1
0
2

0
2
0
2

1
2
0
2

2
2
0
2

3
2
0
2

# at−risk bank domains

Fig. 4: Number of at-risk websites for closed banks set to expire each year.

4 Policy Options

The domains that were once used by banks are not alone in having a residual
reputation that might be exploited once the original owner ﬁnds them to be
surplus to requirement. It is possible to imagine scenarios in which the domains
associated with newspapers, e-commerce or the provision of stock market prices
might be used for nefarious purposes by a new owner.

There are also domains that were created solely to do harm, which need to be
kept out of circulation for a considerable period. Botnet command and control
(C&C) domains fall into this category. When malware infects a new machine it
will contact the controlling system for instructions so that it can join in with
botnet activities. The malware typically locates the controller by resolving a
baked-in hostname. A key part of neutralizing this type of botnet is to prevent
the hostname from resolving – usually by having the domain name suspended.
However, once the domain name expires (because the botnet operators are
unlikely to renew it) then it becomes available for anyone to register. One of the
authors of this paper purchased an old botnet C&C domain a year after it had
been suspended and found that there were still around 5 000 malware infected
machines attempting to make contact. A less civic-minded registrant could have
easily resurrected the botnet.

Similarly, some iframe injection exploits in late 2012 were dealt with by taking
down the websites hosting the malicious JavaScript. Unfortunately, the websites
that had been compromised to add an iframe to fetch the injected code were
not all cleaned up. In early October 2013 the domains came under the control
of someone who once again supplied malicious JavaScript – and the original
security problem had to be tackled for a second time.

We now review a range of mechanisms that might be adopted in order to
address the problem of the control of domains that should not be available for
just anyone to register for an extended period.

The Ghosts of Banking Past

13

Permanent cancellation: The domain would be permanently canceled and
would not be available for anyone to register ever again. This is obviously avoids
any possible harm – but preventing all future use will often be overkill; and all
sorts of complications would arise if, for example, a bank decided to resurrect a
legacy brand and wanted to recover the domain that they used to own. It would
also be hard to determine objective criteria for putting a domain name into this
state, whether or not the previous owner agreed that it might be for the best.

Prepaid escrow: It could become a requirement for certain classes of domain
name to be prepaid for many years into the future. A regulator such as FDIC
could require the cost of future domain renewal and management to be escrowed
as a prerequisite of operating a customer-facing website. The same eﬀect would
be achieved by requiring that banks make the FDIC the registrant of record
rather than letting the domain expire – with the FDIC underwriting their costs
from their general operating budget, or perhaps by a speciﬁc levy on active
banks. This policy option would be almost impossible to operate outside of a
statute-based regulatory regime, so it does not address maliciously registered
domains.

Trusted repository: A neutral body could be created to hold relevant domains
in trust and it would be excused annual payment for the domain registration.
This body would decide, on the basis of expert analysis of the available evidence,
when a domain could be returned to the general pool. Until that point it would be
‘sinkholed’ – accesses would be logged to assist the decision making process, and
perhaps to assist in informing the owners of compromised websites and machines
that they had a security problem that should be addressed. Once again, the
problem would be to determine the criteria for putting domains into this state
– an obvious abuse would be for brand owners to see this as a cheap way of
parking domains. Finding some way of funding the necessary infrastructure and
of obtaining expert advice would also be somewhat problematic.

Warning lock: Domains that were perceived to have a residual value could be
specially tracked so that their imminent expiry triggered warnings to the com-
munity. It would then be necessary for public spirited organizations to step up
and renew any domains that were not deemed safe to allow just anyone to renew.
This policy option is essentially a distributed version of the trusted repository
just discussed, and although it could be eﬀective for some types of domain its
impact is likely to be extremely patchy. It might be argued that the present
ad hoc arrangements for sinkholing maliciously registered domains, operated by
organizations such as Shadowserver and Team Cymru, serve as prototypes for
this type of approach.

It is perhaps unlikely that the best remedy for preventing the creation of ‘ghost’
websites will be the same as the ideal solution for blocking the resurrection of

14

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

maliciously registered domains, so we do not propose a universally applicable
approach. However, for bank websites we conclude that of the available options,
prepaid escrow would be the most practical mechanism to adopt since it could
easily be added to the winding-down process managed by FDIC.

5 Related Work

There has been considerable empirical research investigating the nature of phish-
ing attacks impersonating banks [6,7]. To our knowledge, there has been no
prior work discussing the re-use of closed banking websites. However, several
researchers have observed that spammers sometimes re-register expired domains
in order to beneﬁt from the reputation of the old domain [2,3,4]. For instance,
Hao et al. found that spammers quickly register recently expired domains, much
faster than non-spammers [4].

There has also been detailed research into ‘typo-squatting’, where domains
are registered with similar names to popular websites [8]. The hope is that users
will mistype URLs, reach the ‘wrong’ place and, by clicking on adverts for the
‘real’ site thereby make money for the domain registrants. In the present case,
where there is no ‘real’ site anymore, someone using the domain names to catch
traﬃc from people who had forgotten about the demise of their bank could only
serve up adverts for generic banking or insurance products.

Kalafut et al. examine ‘orphan’ DNS servers, whose domains have (usually)
been suspended due to malicious activity but remain in the DNS as authoritative
for some domains [5]. They note that attackers could re-register these domains
to take control of otherwise operational domains. This resembles our study in
that websites could cause harm if brought back online, though in our study we
consider legitimate, trusted resources (banks) instead of illicit websites.

There are counterbalances to the use of confusingly similar domain names
and these might conceivably be used to tackle the reuse of domain names in a
confusing context. Some jurisdictions have explicit legislation; in the US there is
the Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act of 1999 (15 U.S.C. §1125(d))
and the Truth in Domain Names Act of 2003 (18 U.S.C. §2252B). Addition-
ally, Uniform Dispute Resolution Procedures (UDRP) are operated by many of
the domain registries. The UDRP process is a form of arbitration that allows
complainants to recover domains from unworthy registrants [1] but there is no
provision for third parties to initiate proceedings, and presumably a bank that
has let domains lapse would have limited interest in expensive action under a
UDRP regime.

6 Concluding Remarks

We have investigated what happens to domains that were once used for customer-
facing banking websites after their owners change or disappear. By inspecting
over 2 000 websites associated with banks that have closed in the last decade,
we can provide insights drawn from a statistically robust dataset.

The Ghosts of Banking Past

15

We ﬁnd that while many websites initially remain in the hands of a bank, over
time these websites tend to become inactive and their domains are frequently
allowed to expire. Large banks tend to hold on for longer but even they frequently
choose to relinquish control eventually. When domains do expire they are often
quickly acquired by non-banks and repurposed. Logistic regressions have been
presented to precisely quantify this behavior.

Often the domains of closed banks are used to serve advertising but other,
more sinister, uses may occur. Most reuse is lawful, albeit ethically questionable,
such as when advertisers trade on the residual reputation of collapsed institu-
tions. However, older domains are occasionally used to serve malware. Further-
more, in a handful of cases we saw domains that were no longer owned by the
original bank but they served up content that made them look as if the original
bank was still operating.

What, if anything, should be done? We have examined various policy options
that would ensure that the residual reputation of bank domains is not used
outside the banking sector. While each approach has drawbacks, placing domains
in prepaid escrow as part of FDIC’s bank closure process seems most compelling.
Although this paper concentrates on banking domains as an exemplar of
domains where controlling future ownership of the domains might reduce risk,
we also drew attention to other classes of domain where there is a strong public
interest in controlling registration, such as botnet C&C domains and maliciously
registered malware exploit domains. Unfortunately, policy solutions for these
latter types of domain are rather more limited. Nonetheless, the current solution
of having public-spirited organizations hold on to them can already be seen to
have occasional failures, so we must expect that many more ghosts will come
back to haunt us in the future.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback. This work
was partially funded by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Science
and Technology Directorate, Cyber Security Division (DHSS&T/CSD) Broad
Agency Announcement 11.02, the Government of Australia and SPAWAR Sys-
tems Center Paciﬁc via contract number N66001-13-C-0131. Richard Clayton’s
initial contribution was made whilst he was collaborating with the National
Physical Laboratory (NPL) under EPSRC Grant EP/H018298/1, “Internet Se-
curity”. This paper represents the position of the authors and not that of the
aforementioned agencies.

References

1. Warren B. Chik. Lord of your domain, but master of none: The need to harmonize
and recalibrate the domain name regime of ownership and control. Int J Law Info
Tech, 16(1):8–72, 2008.

16

Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton

2. Na Dai, Brian D. Davison, and Xiaoguang Qi. Looking into the past to better
classify web spam. In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Adversarial
Information Retrieval on the Web, AIRWeb ’09, pages 1–8, New York, NY, USA,
2009. ACM.

3. Zolt´an Gy¨ongyi and Hector Garcia-Molina. Web spam taxonomy. In AIRWeb, pages

39–47, 2005.

4. Shuang Hao, Matthew Thomas, Vern Paxson, Nick Feamster, Christian Kreibich,
Chris Grier, and Scott Hollenbeck. Understanding the domain registration behavior
of spammers. Proc. ACM SIGCOMM IMC, 2013.

5. Andrew J. Kalafut, Minaxi Gupta, Christopher A. Cole, Lei Chen, and Nathan E.
Myers. An empirical study of orphan dns servers in the internet. In Proceedings
of the 10th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, IMC ’10, pages
308–314, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

6. Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton. Examining the impact of website take-down on
phishing. In Lorrie Faith Cranor, editor, eCrime Researchers Summit, volume 269
of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, pages 1–13. ACM, 2007.

7. Tyler Moore and Richard Clayton. The consequence of non-cooperation in the
ﬁght against phishing. In Third APWG eCrime Researchers Summit, Atlanta, GA,
October 2008.

8. Tyler Moore and Benjamin Edelman. Measuring the perpetrators and funders of
typosquatting.
In Radu Sion, editor, Financial Cryptography and Data Security,
volume 6052 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 175–191. Springer, 2010.

