Sex, Lies, or Kittens? Investigating the Use of

Snapchat’s Self-Destructing Messages

Franziska Roesner1, Brian T. Gill2, and Tadayoshi Kohno1

1 University of Washington, Computer Science & Engineering

2 Seattle Paciﬁc University, Mathematics

Abstract. The privacy-related Snapchat smartphone application allows
users to share time-limited photos or videos, which “disappear” after
a speciﬁed number of seconds once opened. This paper describes the
results of a user survey designed to help us understand how and why
people use the Snapchat application. We surveyed 127 adult Snapchat
users, ﬁnding that security is not a major concern for the majority of
these respondents. We learn that most do not use Snapchat to send
sensitive content (although up to 25% may do so experimentally), that
taking screenshots is not generally a violation of the sender’s trust but
instead common and expected, that most respondents understand that
messages can be recovered, and that security and privacy concerns are
overshadowed by other inﬂuences on how and why respondents choose
to use or not use Snapchat. Nevertheless, we ﬁnd that a non-negligible
fraction (though not a majority) of respondents have adapted or would
adapt their behavior in response to understanding Snapchat’s (lack of)
security properties, suggesting that there remains an opportunity for a
more secure messaging application. We reﬂect on the implications of our
ﬁndings for Snapchat and on the design of secure messaging applications.

1

Introduction

The privacy-related Snapchat smartphone application1 allows users to share
time-limited photos or videos with friends. Users take photos or videos using the
application and specify the number of seconds (up to ten) for which the recipient
is allowed to view the content. After this time, the content “disappears” — i.e.,
it is no longer accessible via the Snapchat user interface, but it is not actually
securely deleted from the device. Snapchat’s popularity has increased dramati-
cally in recent months, with over 8 million adult users [31], 350 million “snaps”
sent every day [17], and a possible valuation of up to $3.5 billion [6].

We surveyed 127 adult Snapchat users, ﬁnding that security is not a ma-
jor concern for the majority of them, despite our sample being slightly skewed
towards users with higher self-reported security expertise. We ﬁnd that most
respondents do not use Snapchat primarily for sensitive content (although up to
25% may do so experimentally), that screenshots are common and expected, and
that most respondents understand that messages can be recovered. However, a
non-negligible fraction (though not a majority) of respondents has adapted or
would adapt their behavior in response to weakened trust in Snapchat, suggest-
ing that there remains an opportunity for a more secure messaging application.

1 http://www.snapchat.com

Fig. 1. Snapchat screenshots. On the left, Snapchat runs on an Android phone.
The timer indicates the number of seconds that this image will be viewable by recipients.
Users can add caption text or draw arbitrarily on top of the picture. On the right,
Snapchat’s log shows sent and received “snaps” (usernames hidden for anonymity),
e.g., indicating that the recipient of the second message in the list took a screenshot.

2 Background and Motivation

We ﬁrst provide background on Snapchat, an application that allows users to
send photos and videos that “disappear” after a speciﬁed number of seconds.
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the Snapchat application running on Android.

Snapchat usage. Snapchat’s primary feature is that each message “disappears”
once the recipient has opened it and the sender-speciﬁed timeout (of up to ten
seconds) has elapsed. The ephemeral nature of Snapchat messages naturally
evokes the idea of its use for privacy-sensitive content — indeed, much media
buzz has been made about Snapchat’s potential use for sexual content (“sex-
ting”) [21]. In practice, however, it appears that Snapchat is used for a variety
of creative purposes that are not necessarily privacy-related. For example, many
people make use of the application’s support for easily drawing on photos [24],
and others (including Snapchat itself) argue that disappearing messages also
reduce inhibitions for sending non-sensitive, in-the-moment content, challenging
the “never forgets” nature of the Internet and other social media services [14,
16]. These and similar anecdotes led us to ask: How and for what do people really
use Snapchat? What are common, uncommon, or surprising usage patterns?

Saving and retrieving snaps. Importantly, the way in which Snapchat im-
plements message destruction is not secure. In practice, there are many ways
to save or retrieve “snaps” on a user’s device after their timeout has elapsed.
In one class of data exﬁltration, recipients can take screenshots of messages as
they view them, using the operating system’s application-agnostic screenshot
capabilities (e.g., holding the volume down and power buttons on a Samsung
Galaxy Nexus device). The Snapchat application can (generally) detect these

kinds of screenshots, in which case it notiﬁes the sender (e.g., the second mes-
sage in the list in Figure 1). However, this notiﬁcation is not always reliable, as
users have discovered ways to take screenshots without alerting the Snapchat
application (e.g., [10]). In light of these capabilities, websites have emerged that
encourage people to post screenshots of embarrassing or sensitive “snaps” (e.g.,
SnapchatLeaked [1]). In our study, we attempt to answer the following questions:
What are users’ screenshot practices? To what extent are screenshots a common
and expected use of the application, rather than a violation of the sender’s trust?
Another class of attacks exploits the fact that Snapchat doesn’t actually
delete from the device messages that have passed their timeout. Instead, it simply
renames the ﬁles and makes them inaccessible via its user interface. As a result,
people with moderate technical expertise can retrieve these ﬁles from a device
even for destroyed messages (e.g., [8, 9]). Snapchat itself does not claim perfect
security, warning that deleted data can sometimes be retrieved [26]. Thus, we ask:
Do users have a realistic mental model with respect to Snapchat’s security? Do
they trust Snapchat? Does this mental model aﬀect their use of the application?

3 User Survey

To explore the above questions, we designed a survey that was taken by 127
adult Snapchat users. We estimate that the survey, which consisted of at most
41 optional questions per respondent, took 15-30 minutes to complete. We sur-
veyed only adults (18 years or older), who we recruited primarily by sharing the
survey link via our own and our contacts’ social media pages and via university
email lists. As a result, our sample is slightly skewed towards respondents with
higher self-reported security expertise — however, reported security expertise did
not signiﬁcantly aﬀect most responses. Furthermore, while reports suggest that
Snapchat is also popular among 13-18 year olds [29], sexting-style behavior is not
necessarily more common among younger users [28]. This study was reviewed
and found exempt by our institution’s human subjects ethics review board.

Of 206 initial recruits, 18 (8.7%) responded that they do not know what
Snapchat is and were screened out. Of the remaining 188 respondents, 61 (32.4%)
responded that they had never used Snapchat. We report the remainder of our
results considering only the 127 self-reported Snapchat users. Unless otherwise
noted, questions were multiple choice; free responses and multiple-choice “other”
responses were coded independently by two of the authors.

Demographics. 68.5% of Snapchat-using respondents were male and 29.9%
female (two did not specify). Although our population is skewed towards male
respondents, we ﬁnd almost no statistically signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences. Most
respondents (81.9%) were between the ages of 18-24; 14.2% were between the
ages of 25-34, 1.6% between 35-44, 0% between 45-54, and 1.6% between 55-64.
When asked to describe their level of familiarity with computer security on a
scale of 1 (novice) to 5 (expert), 12.6% considered themselves an expert and only
4.7% a novice, with a plurality (31.5%) selecting option 4 on the scale. (Note that
ten respondents were not asked about security expertise because we added the
question to the survey after they had already completed it. All other questions

Fig. 2. Do respondents send sensitive content? For each type of content we asked
about, respondents indicated whether they primarily send it and/or have sent it. They
report sending sensitive content (sexual, legally questionable, mean/oﬀensive/insulting
content, and documents) uniformly less than non-sensitive content.

were unmodiﬁed.) We also asked respondents to rate their agreement with three
privacy-related prompts, allowing us to classify them according to the Westin
Privacy Index [18] as Privacy Fundamentalists, Privacy Pragmatists, or Privacy
Unconcerned. We found that 39.4% of respondents are Privacy Fundamentalists,
45.7% are Privacy Pragmatists, and 12.6% are Privacy Unconcerned.

3.1 Common Usage Patterns

We ﬁrst explore whether our respondents use Snapchat to send sensitive (such
as sexual) content, and then consider whether respondents’ message timeout be-
haviors and reported reasons for using Snapchat suggest privacy considerations.

Do respondents send sensitive content? We asked respondents about whether
they primarily send and/or have sent certain types of sensitive content us-
ing Snapchat, including sexual, legally questionable, mean/oﬀensive/insulting
content, and documents. We provided additional non-sensitive options to avoid
priming respondents; Figure 2 shows the response options and responses.

We ﬁnd that only 1.6% of respondents report using Snapchat primarily for
“sexting” — although 14.2% admit to having sent sexual content via Snapchat
at some point. (More, 23.6%, admit to having sent content classiﬁed as “joke
sexting,” in which sexual or pseudo-sexual content is sent as a joke.) Though
some do appear to use Snapchat for sensitive content, respondents in aggregate
report sending sensitive content types uniformly less than non-sensitive content
(Figure 2). However, we may consider self-photographs to be borderline sensitive:
while most content types show no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between Westin Privacy
types, Privacy Unconcerned respondents are slightly more likely to say that
they primarily send “photos/videos of myself” (62.5%) than Pragmatists (31%)
or Fundamentalists (28%) (Fisher’s exact test, 2 d.f., p = 0.042).

While we recognize that respondents may have underreported how often they
send sensitive content (as we discuss further in Section 4), our ﬁndings suggest
that they do seem to ﬁnd Snapchat useful for non-sensitive content. In a free re-

sponse question about additional Snapchat experiences, several respondents em-
phasized using Snapchat for fun, sending messages with silly or mundane content
that they might not otherwise send via a messaging platform that emphasizes
archival rather than temporariness. For example, one respondent mentioned that
Snapchat “lets me have more cats in my life because my friends who don’t nor-
mally post pictures of their cats on other social media will snapchat their cats
to me.” Others mention that they use it to send photos of “stupid faces” and
another wishes for an option to “add moustaches to those faces.” Indeed, of
the content options presented in our survey, respondents most commonly chose
funny content as their primary use for Snapchat (59.8%).

Does message timeout behavior reﬂect privacy considerations? A pos-
sible explanation for Snapchat’s recent success is its implied security and privacy
properties. To evaluate this claim, we consider whether our respondents’ use of
message timeouts or their choice of Snapchat suggest privacy considerations.

First, we asked respondents multiple choice questions about the message
timeout that they set (up to ten seconds). About half (52.8%) use a ﬁxed or
arbitrary timeout length, regardless of content type or recipient. The remain-
ing 47.2% report adjusting the timeout depending on content and/or recipient.
When asked about the reason,2 many of these respondents report setting shorter
timeouts for embarrassing photos (22.8% of 127) or for secret information (10%).
Many also report setting longer timeouts for people they trust more (18.9%) or
shorter timeouts for people they trust less (10%).

A possible explanation for shorter timeouts is an attempt to control screen-
shots by recipients. Two respondents explained in “other” responses that they
set shorter timeouts if a screenshot should be avoided and longer timeouts if one
is desired (particularly for photos of cats, according to one respondent). Another
mentioned “a tacit agreement that if the timeout is 10sec, then a screenshot is
almost expected.” However, not all timeout manipulation is for privacy reasons:
12 respondents (9.4%) explained in “other” responses that they set a longer time-
out if the message takes more time to comprehend (e.g., includes a lot of text),
and more may have selected this answer choice had we included it explicitly.

These results suggest that up to a quarter of respondents do adjust timeouts
with privacy in mind (e.g., in an attempt to avoid screenshots). However, most do
not explicitly manage timeouts. We observed no signiﬁcant associations between
Privacy Index or reported security expertise and timeout behavior.

Do respondents use Snapchat for security/privacy reasons? We asked
respondents why, when they use Snapchat, they choose it over other services
such as email, text messaging, Facebook, or Twitter. We included two security-
related options, as well as additional options to avoid priming respondents. While
a non-negligible (though not majority) of respondents prefers Snapchat because
content is unlikely to or can’t (according to the respondent’s belief) be saved

2 Respondents could select multiple answers: I set shorter timeouts for embarrassing
photos; I set shorter timeouts for content containing secret information; I set longer
timeouts for people I trust more. I set shorter timeouts for people I trust less; Other.

Fig. 3. Do screenshots violate trust?
Only a minority of respondents reports
that the victim changed his or her behavior
or was angry after learning of a screenshot
or photo. Respondents more commonly se-
lected neutral (“didn’t care”) or positive
(“thought it was funny”) answer choices.
Note that respondents could select multiple
response options.

(46.5% chose one or both of these answer choices), not all of these respondents
appear to like message disappearance for security or privacy reasons. Instead,
some explicitly report liking it because it becomes socially acceptable to send
more casual, in-the-moment content and/or to “spam” friends: 6 respondents
(4.7%) who selected the “other” response wrote in sentiments like: “expectation
of spam means it’s ok to spam,” “some content, whether or not it’s risque, does
not need to be seen more than once (e.g., photos of food),” or “Snapchat allows
for less serious communication.” Respondents more frequently selected answer
choices unrelated to security or privacy, most commonly that Snapchat is easy
and simple (66.1%) and/or more fun to use (55.9%).

3.2 Screenshot Practices

One might argue that screenshots circumvent Snapchat’s intended usage model
and violate the sender’s trust, thus expecting that screenshots are taken rarely.

How often do respondents take screenshots? Contrary to expectation, we
ﬁnd that it is common for respondents to take screenshots of Snapchat mes-
sages: 47.2% admit to taking screenshots and 52.8% report that others have
taken screenshots of their messages. We also found that a small numbers of re-
spondents have used a separate camera to take a photo of a Snapchat message
(5 respondents, or 3.9%) or report that someone has used a separate camera to
take a photo of their message (3 respondents). While most respondents didn’t
select reasons for taking screenshots that indicated the explicit intent to violate
trust, 10.2% admit that they have done so to embarrass the sender.

How do respondents and their contacts react to screenshots? If mes-
sage senders feel that their trust is violated by a screenshot, they may react with
anger or by changing their behavior: by sending messages with shorter timeouts
or diﬀerent content, by no longer sending messages to that recipient, and/or
by taking a screenshot in retaliation. Using these alongside options indicating
neutral (e.g., “didn’t care”) and positive (e.g., “thought it was funny”) senti-
ments, we asked respondents both about their own reactions to screenshots of
their messages as well as about the reactions of people of whose messages they
took screenshots. Figure 3 summarizes these responses.

Only 11.8% of respondents reported reacting by changing their own behavior;
only 15.0% reported that their contact changed his or her behavior. Even fewer
respondents reported themselves or their contacts reacting with anger (4.4% and

6.7%, respectively). Respondents more commonly chose answer choices indicat-
ing neutral (“didn’t care”) or positive (“thought it was funny”) reactions.

Thus, screenshots seem to be an ordinary and expected component of Snap-
chat use among our respondents. Recall also from Section 3.1 the anecdote that
longer timeouts implicitly permit the recipient to take a screenshot. Interest-
ingly, Privacy Unconcerned respondents were more likely to report having taken
a screenshot (64.7%) than Pragmatists (33.7%) or Fundamentalists (22.0%)
(Fisher’s exact test, 2 d.f., p = 0.0026). This ﬁnding suggests that privacy-
sensitive respondents, who may be more likely to view a screenshot as a trust
violation, are less likely to take a screenshot themselves.

3.3 Eﬀects of Security Weaknesses

Since Snapchat is marketed as a secure messaging application, one might expect
discoveries about its insecurity to threaten its popularity. We directly asked
respondents about their views of Snapchat’s security, and we infer additional
security-related views from their reported behaviors.

Do respondents know Snapchat message destruction is insecure? We
asked respondents whether they believe that someone with technical expertise
can recover expired Snapchat messages on a device. (As discussed in Section 2,
the correct answer to this question is “yes” [8, 9].) We ﬁnd that a majority
of respondents (79.4%) says that they know or think that recovering “snaps” is
possible. Only a minority of respondents thinks or “knows” that expired messages
cannot be recovered (14.1%); the rest (5.5%) responded that they don’t know.
Our sample is skewed towards respondents with security expertise, who may
have more realistic security mental models than the average Snapchat user. In-
deed, knowing the message destruction is insecure was associated with higher
levels of security expertise (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p = 0.014). Respondents
may also have been made suspicious by the availability of certain answer choices.
Nevertheless, we were surprised at the large majority of respondents who re-
ported knowing or suspecting that Snapchat’s message destruction is insecure.

Do respondents report security-related behavior changes? We asked
respondents about whether and how they would change their Snapchat use in
response to learning that message destruction is insecure. We ﬁnd that a small
majority (52.8%) reports that experts ﬁnding a way to recover expired messages
would not aﬀect their use of the application at all. However, a non-negligible
(38.6%) report that they would change or have changed their behavior (by using
Snapchat less, sending diﬀerent content, and/or sending messages to diﬀerent
people) in response to learning that message destruction is not secure. A major-
ity of these behavior-changing respondents do not report that they would use
Snapchat less (14.2% of 127), suggesting that Snapchat’s lack of security may
not dramatically reduce its user base. Nevertheless, since they would use it dif-
ferently (24.4% of 127), our results suggest that there remains an opportunity
for a more secure ephemeral messaging application, as we discuss in Section 4.

Does lack of trust in Snapchat aﬀect content respondents send? Above,
we described how respondents said they would change their behavior upon learn-

ing that Snapchat messages can be recovered. Because the majority already knew
or suspected that message destruction is insecure, these responses don’t yet give
us a clear idea of how respondents’ behavior is aﬀected by their (lack of) trust
in Snapchat. We thus also examine what types of content respondents report
not sending via Snapchat and why.3 Overwhelmingly, respondents are willing to
send most types of content via Snapchat, with the following exceptions:

– 74.8% of respondents are not willing to send content classiﬁed as “sexting” or
“joke sexting.” The primary reported reason is that these respondents “never
take pictures of that kind of thing” (47.2%), followed by fear of screenshots
(25.2%) and distrust of Snapchat (14.2%).

– 85.0% of respondents are not willing to send photos of documents via Snap-
chat, primarily because they “never take pictures of that sort of thing”
(30.7%). Many would “rather send it another way” (e.g., email, text message,
Facebook, Twitter) (26.8%), in part because they don’t want documents to
disappear (18.1%). Only 11.8% wouldn’t trust Snapchat with documents.

– 86.6% of respondents are not willing to send messages containing legally
questionable content, again primarily because they “never take pictures of
that kind of thing” (66.9%). Concerns about screenshots and Snapchat’s
trustworthiness were also present in this case (12.6% and 8.7% respectively),
possibly because of the risk of legal ramiﬁcations. Indeed, three of 16 free
responses explaining additional reasons for not using Snapchat for certain
content were related to legality issues and/or concerns that Snapchat may
allow government access to user data, the latter now known to be true [25].
– 93.7% of respondents are not willing to send content considered mean, oﬀen-
sive, or insulting, reporting primarily that they “never take pictures of that
kind of thing” (73.2%), followed by “I don’t want to bother people” (15.7%).
Thus, although most respondents don’t use Snapchat for certain types of
content primarily because they don’t produce such content, the remaining re-
spondents commonly selected fear of screenshots or lack of trust in Snapchat as
reasons for avoiding it. Considering sexual, legally questionable, oﬀensive content
and/or documents as “more sensitive,” we ﬁnd that respondents were more likely
to be concerned about screenshots or about trusting Snapchat for these than for
less sensitive types of content. Only 3.1% of respondents indicated concern about
screenshots for non-sensitive content compared to 33.1% for potentially sensi-
tive content (McNemar’s test, p < 0.001), and only 1.6% don’t send non-sensitive
content because they don’t trust Snapchat, compared to 26.0% for potentially
sensitive content (McNemar’s test, p < 0.001).

More generally, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant diﬀerence among the Privacy Index
groups (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test, χ2 = 9.88, 2 d.f., p = 0.0072) in how

3 For each type of content in Figure 2 that a respondent would not be willing to send
via Snapchat, he/she could select multiple reasons for why not: I’m afraid someone
will take a screenshot or photo; I don’t trust the Snapchat application; I never take
pictures of that kind of thing; I don’t want to bother people; I don’t want it to
disappear; I want to share it more publicly; I’d rather send it another way (such as
using email, text message, Facebook, Twitter).

frequently they use Snapchat at all: Privacy Unconcerned report using it more
frequently than both Pragmatists (p = 0.021) and Fundamentalists (p = 0.002).
That is, privacy-sensitive respondents tend to use Snapchat less frequently.

4 Discussion

We reﬂect on the implications of our ﬁndings, including perspectives from re-
spondents given with “other” responses to multiple choice questions or in a
free-response question asking about additional thoughts regarding Snapchat.

Implications for Snapchat. Some potential Snapchat users may assume that
the application is intended or commonly used for “sexting” or other sensitive
content. For example, before ending the survey for 61 respondents who reported
not using Snapchat, we asked them about why they have chosen not to use it.
While mostly simply expressed lack of interest, several voiced concerns related to
sensitive content, including that Snapchat “has a bad reputation (for sexting),”
that it “seems useful for only inappropriate content,” and that “there are addi-
tional connotations that go along with this particular app.” By contrast, we ﬁnd
that although some of our 127 Snapchat-using respondents do use Snapchat for
sensitive content, they don’t report using it primarily for this purpose, and they
commonly report ﬁnding it useful for non-sensitive content (e.g., funny content).
Our ﬁndings are also in contrast with media coverage of every new Snapchat
vulnerability (e.g., [8–10]), which often implies that Snapchat’s success depends
on it being actually secure. Instead, our survey results suggest that Snapchat’s
success is not due to its security properties but because users ﬁnd Snapchat to be
fun. Because they don’t often send sensitive content, respondents may not need
messages to disappear securely, but the mere disappearance of messages from the
user interface seems to appeal to some. Some report feeling comfortable sending
casual content more frequently via Snapchat because “it doesn’t feel like spam”
and “it makes it easy not to think about the storage of old messages.”

Thus, Snapchat may be better served by advertising itself without implied
security properties, focusing rather on the “fun” factor and the change in social
media norms introduced by ephemeral content. There is evidence that Snapchat
has already begun to embrace this shift in its role: for example, after the launch
of our survey, Snapchat introduced “stories” that live for 24 hours [27]. The
company has also explicitly backed away from security promises [26].

Implications for secure messaging applications. Most respondents appear
to understand Snapchat’s weaknesses and most report they have not or would not
change their behavior in response. However, recall that about 40% report that
they would change or have changed their behavior in response to this knowledge,
and that security-sensitive respondents reported using Snapchat less frequently.
Indeed, a non-trivial fraction of respondents reports that they don’t send
sensitive content in part because they don’t trust Snapchat or they are worried
about screenshots. Respondents may also have underreported sending sensitive
content or already incorporated their knowledge of Snapchat’s weaknesses into
their reported behaviors. Some emphasized using Snapchat for fun while remain-
ing aware of its lack of absolute security. For example, one respondent said, “I

use Snapchat knowing that it’s a limited tool (screencaptures at the OS-level
are easy), so I use it knowing that the impermanence is artiﬁcial (meaning that
I have to trust my friends to play along).” Another expressed hesitation: “I like
the idea of Snapchat, but it deﬁnitely worries me that the photos are ‘out there’
somewhere, even if the snaps I’m sending don’t have sensitive content.”

Combined, the above two paragraphs suggest that while Snapchat is useful
and fun for a large set of users for non-sensitive content, a more secure messaging
platform would still be a valuable addition to the set of communication tools for
many users. In particular, these users would likely value the following properties
in a more secure messaging system: (1) privacy on the server-side (i.e., from
company employees), (2) privacy in transit, (3) more secure message destruction
on the device and in the cloud, and (4) a higher bar for message recipients to save
messages, e.g., by completely preventing screenshots. In practice, many of these
features may be challenging or impossible to achieve — for example, message
recipients can always use another device to take photos even if screenshots are
prohibited (i.e., the “analog hole”). Nevertheless, an application that adequately
addresses even a subset of these issues would signiﬁcantly raise the bar over
Snapchat and may attract some of these more privacy-sensitive users.

Study limitations. We highlight several limitations that prevent us from gen-
eralizing our results to the entire population of Snapchat users. First, our survey
did not reach a random sample of users but rather propagated through our own
social and university networks (snowball sampling). Additionally, we only sur-
veyed respondents at least 18 years of age, though reports suggest that Snapchat
is also popular among younger users [29]. Finally, we asked about respondents’
behaviors rather than observing them directly, allowing respondents to under-
report potentially sensitive behaviors or beliefs, and we used primarily multiple
choice questions that limit our ability to explore respondents’ behaviors and
mental models more generally. Future studies are thus needed to better under-
stand Snapchat use in the wild among a more general population.

5 Related Work

Finally, we brieﬂy summarize related work. In the research community, there
have been a number of eﬀorts toward creating self-destructing data, including
early work by Perlman [22] and more recent work on Vanish [11, 12], as well as
work on attacking speciﬁc implementations of Vanish with Sybil attacks [33]. An
analysis of diﬀerent approaches for secure data deletion appears in [23]. There
have also been signiﬁcant eﬀorts toward ephemeral two-way communications,
such as the oﬀ-the-record messaging system [4, 13].

Commercial examples of messaging applications that reportedly support mes-
sage destruction include TigerText [30], Wickr [32], and Facebook’s Poke [2],
which emerged as a potential competitor to Snapchat and reportedly encrypts
messages and deletes the encryption key after two days [7]. Another Snapchat-
inspired idea is BlinkLink [3], a link that disappears after some number of views.
Other researchers have studied users’ interactions with social media from a
security and privacy perspective. For example, studies have shown that users

struggle to understand and apply Facebook privacy settings (e.g., [15, 19]) and
that privacy violations on Twitter are a growing problem [20]. Others have con-
sidered the privacy strategies of users on social networks more generally [5].

6 Conclusion

We surveyed 127 adult users of the privacy-related Snapchat smartphone appli-
cation, which allows users to send messages that “disappear” after a timeout.
We found that security and privacy are not major concerns for the majority
of respondents. Respondents more commonly respond that they use Snapchat
because it is fun, not because of its implied or actual security properties. Indeed,
most respondents understand that Snapchat’s message destruction is insecure,
but they do not send sensitive messages (such as sexual or legally question-
able content) more commonly because they don’t produce such content than
because they don’t trust Snapchat or their friends. We ﬁnd that screenshots are
common and that respondents appear not to consider them a trust violation.
Nevertheless, we observe that a non-negligible fraction (but not a majority) of
respondents adapt their behavior in response to Snapchat’s weak security prop-
erties, and thus conclude that these users may still have a use for a more secure
messaging application in addition to the more casual, fun-focused Snapchat.

Acknowledgements. We thank our shepherd, Serge Egelman, and the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable feedback. We thank our survey respondents for their par-
ticipation, Tamara Denning for feedback on the survey, and Greg Akselrod for feedback
on an earlier draft. The cats Tony and Fidget posed for Figure 1. This work is supported
in part by the National Science Foundation (Grant CNS-0846065 and a Graduate Re-
search Fellowship, Grant DGE-0718124) and by a Microsoft Research PhD Fellowship.

References
1. Snapchat Leaked, http://snapchatleaked.com/
2. Aguilar, M.: Poke: Facebook just cloned Snapchat (Dec 2012), http://gizmodo.

com/5970590/

3. Allsopp, C.: BlinkLink Post-Mortem (Aug 2013), http://clayallsopp.com/

posts/blinklink/

4. Borisov, N., Goldberg, I., Brewer, E.: Oﬀ-the-record communication, or, why not

to use PGP. In: ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society (2004)

5. boyd, d., Marwick, A.E.: Social privacy in networked publics: Teens attitudes,
practices, and strategies. In: Oxford Internet Institute Decade in Internet Time
Symposium (2011)

6. Colao, J.: Is Snapchat Raising Another Round At A $3.5 Billion Valuation?
(Oct 2013), http://www.forbes.com/sites/jjcolao/2013/10/25/is-snapchat-
raising-another-round-at-a-3-5-billion-valuation/

7. Constine, J.: Your Facebook pokes are stored for two days, then their encryp-
tion keys are deleted (Dec 2012), http://techcrunch.com/2012/12/22/your-
facebook-pokes-are-stored-for-two-days

8. Ducklin, P.: Snapchat images that have “disappeared forever” stay right on your
phone... (May 2013), http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2013/05/10/snapchat
9. Dunn, G.: Yet another way to retrieve deleted Snapchat photos (Jun 2013),

http://www.salon.com/2013/06/04/yet_another_way_to_retrieve_deleted_
snapchat_photos_partner/

10. Empson, R.: Not-So-Ephemeral Messaging: New SnapChat “Hack” Lets Users Save

Photos Forever (Jan 2013), http://techcrunch.com/2013/01/22/not-so-eph

11. Geambasu, R., Kohno, T., Krishnamurthy, A., Levy, A., Levy, H.M., Gardner, P.,
Moscaritolo, V.: New directions for self-destructing data. Tech. Rep. UW-CSE-11-
08-01, University of Washington (2011)

12. Geambasu, R., Kohno, T., Levy, A., Levy, H.M.: Vanish: Increasing Data Privacy

with Self-Destructing Data. In: 18th USENIX Security Symposium (2009)

13. Goldberg, I.: Oﬀ-the-record messaging, https://otr.cypherpunks.ca/
14. Hoover, R.: What’s the Deal with Snapchat? (Dec 2012), http://ryanhoover.me/

post/38569508918/whats-the-deal-with-snapchat

15. Johnson, M., Egelman, S., Bellovin, S.M.: Facebook and privacy: it’s complicated.

In: 8th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (2012)

16. Jurgenson, N.: Temporary Social Media (Jul 2013), http://blog.snapchat.com/

post/55902851023/temporary-social-media

17. Koh, Y.: Snapchat Sends 350 Million ‘Snaps’ (Sep 2013), http://blogs.wsj.com/

digits/2013/09/09/snapchat-sends-350-million-snaps/

18. Kumaraguru, P., Cranor, L.F.: Privacy indexes: A survey of Westin’s studies. Tech.
Rep. CMU-ISRI-5-138, Institute for Software Research International, School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University (2005)

19. Liu, Y., Gummadi, K.P., Krishnamurthy, B., Mislove, A.: Analyzing Facebook pri-
vacy settings: user expectations vs. reality. In: Internet Measurement Conf. (2011)
20. Meeder, B., Tam, J., Kelley, P.G., Cranor, L.F.: RT @IWantPrivacy: Widespread
Violation of Privacy Settings in the Twitter Social Network. In: IEEE Workshop
on Web 2.0 Security and Privacy (2010)

21. Nye, J.: iPhone’s new app Snapchat which destroys photos after a few seconds is
promoting sexting among teens (Nov 2012), http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/
article-2236586/

22. Perlman, R.: The ephemerizer: Making data disappear. Journal of Information

System Security 1, 51–68 (2005)

23. Reardon, J., Basin, D., Capkun, S.: SoK: Secure Data Deletion. In: IEEE Sympo-

sium on Security and Privacy (2013)

24. Russell, K.: 10 Unusual Ways People Are Using Snapchat (Jul 2013), http://www.

businessinsider.com/weird-ways-people-use-snapchat-2013-7?op=1

25. Schaﬀer, M.: Who Can View My Snaps and Stories (Oct 2013), http://blog.

snapchat.com/post/64036804085/who-can-view-my-snaps-and-stories

26. Snapchat: How Snaps Are Stored And Deleted (May 2013), http://blog.

snapchat.com/post/50060403002/how-snaps-are-stored-and-deleted

27. Snapchat: Surprise! Introducing Snapchat Stories (Oct 2013), http://blog.

snapchat.com/post/62975810329/surprise

28. Survata: Is Snapchat only used for sexing?, http://survata.com/blog/is-

snapchat-only-used-for-sexting-we-asked-5000-people-to-find-out/

29. Tan, G.: Tenth grade tech trends (2013), http://blog.garrytan.com/tenth-

grade-tech-trends-my-survey-data-says-s

30. TigerText: Secure text messaging app for the enterprise, http://tigertext.com/
31. Van Grove, J.: Snapchat snapshot: App counts 8M adult users in U.S. (Jun 2013),

http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57590968-93/

32. Wickr: Wickr: Leave No Trace, https://www.mywickr.com/
33. Wolchok, S., Hofmann, O.S., Heninger, N., Felten, E.W., Halderman, J.A., Ross-
bach, C.J., Waters, B., Witchel, E.: Defeating Vanish with Low-Cost Sybil Attacks
Against Large DHTs. In: Network & Distributed System Security Symp. (2010)

