Mind Your Blocks:

On the Stealthiness of Malicious BGP Hijacks

Pierre-Antoine Vervier

Symantec Research Labs/Eurecom

Olivier Thonnard

Symantec Research Labs

Marc Dacier

Qatar Computing Research Institute

Pierre-Antoine_Vervier@symantec.com

Olivier_Thonnard@symantec.com

mdacier@qf.org.qa

Abstract—Some recent research presented evidence of blocks
of IP addresses being stolen by BGP hijackers to launch spam
campaigns
[35]. This was the ﬁrst time BGP hijacks were
seen in the wild. Since then, only a very few anecdotal cases
have been reported as if hackers were not interested in running
these attacks. However, it is a common belief among network
operators and ISPs that these attacks could be taking place
but, so far, no one has produced evidence to back up that
claim. In this paper, we analyse 18 months of data collected
by an infrastructure speciﬁcally built to answer that question:
are intentional stealthy BGP hijacks routinely taking place in
the Internet? The identiﬁcation of what we believe to be more
than 2,000 malicious hijacks leads to a positive answer. The lack
of ground truth is, of course, a problem but we managed to get
conﬁrmation of some of our ﬁndings thanks to an ISP unwittingly
involved in hijack cases we have spotted. This paper aims at
being an eye opener for the community by shedding some light
on this undocumented threat. We also hope that it will spur new
research to understand why these hijacks are taking place and
how they can be mitigated. Depending on how BGP attacks are
carried out, they can be very disruptive for the whole Internet
and should be looked at very closely. As of today, as much as
20% of the whole IPv4 address space is currently allocated but
not publicly announced, which makes it potentially vulnerable to
such malicious BGP hijacks.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The current Internet routing infrastructure is known to
be vulnerable to BGP hijacking which consists in taking
control of blocks of IP addresses without any consent of the
legitimate owners. This is due to the fact that BGP [36], the
de facto inter-domain routing protocol, relies on the concept
of trust among interconnected autonomous systems (ASes).
Accidental, not necessarily malicious, BGP hijack incidents are
known to occur in the Internet. They are generally attributed to
misconﬁgurations. A few cases have received public disclosure
on network operational mailing lists, such as NANOG, or blog
posts [12], [15], [16], [21]. Techniques to detect these BGP
hijacks have been proposed to help network operators monitor
their own preﬁxes to react quickly to such possible outages.
These approaches suffer from a very high false-positive rate

Permission to freely reproduce all or part of this paper for noncommercial
purposes is granted provided that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Reproduction for commercial purposes is strictly prohibited
without the prior written consent of the Internet Society, the ﬁrst-named author
(for reproduction of an entire paper only), and the author’s employer if the
paper was prepared within the scope of employment.
NDSS’15, 8-11 February 2015, San Diego, CA, USA
Copyright 2015 Internet Society, ISBN 1-891562-38-X
http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2015.23035

[23], [29], [40], [50] which is still acceptable to these users
since they are only interested in alerts related to the networks
they own. Other proposals aim at preventing BGP hijacks [24],
[25], [30] but their large-scale adoption and deployment are
hindered by the implementation cost.

In 2006, Ramachandran et al. [35] introduced a new
phenomenon called “BGP spectrum agility”, which consists of
spammers advertising for a short period of time (i.e., less than
one day) BGP routes to large (i.e., /8) previously unannounced
blocks of IP addresses and, subsequently, using the available
IP addresses for spamming. Later, some other authors also
identiﬁed the emission of spam emails coming from hijacked
preﬁxes [20], [23]. Furthermore, complementing the work done
in [39], we have described in [47] a special case of hijack
in which a couple of IP address blocks were stolen and used
to send spam. Most recently, we have also shown in [46],
thanks to another real-world case,
that correlating routing
anomalies with malicious trafﬁc, such as spam, is not sufﬁcient
to decisively prove the existence of a malicious BGP hijack.

Besides these sparse cases and despite the apparent desire
of some owners to detect whether their own IP address block
could ever be stolen, to the best of our knowledge we have
no documented evidence that BGP attacks are a threat worth
being investigated, since no one has shown that hackers have
the possibility to routinely use that modus operandi to commit
nefarious activities. If they were capable of it, this would
constitute a very serious threat to the Internet since this would
enable them not only to send spam emails while defeating
the classical IP blacklists but, more importantly, to run large
scale DDoS at almost no cost or run man-in-the-middle attacks
against almost any target of their choosing.

Therefore, we feel that there is a need to rigorously assess
the existence and prevalence of this potential threat. This paper
contributes to this objective by providing an in-depth study
of a speciﬁc class of agile spammers that are able to hijack
routinely, persistently and -quite likely- automatically a large
number of blocks of IP addresses to send spam from the stolen
IP space. What truly separates our work from others is that we
do not only uncover a large number of new suspicious cases
but we also gather contextual information to build a compelling
case for the reality of these malicious hijacks and to expose the
modus operandi of the malicious actors. Our results show that
the identiﬁed hijacks were rather successful at circumventing
traditional BGP hijack and spam protection techniques.

The main contribution of this paper is to be an eye-
opener to the fact that frequent, persistent and stealthy BGP

hijack attacks have taken place in the Internet for months or
even years. We achieve this by leveraging a large-scale data
collection system dubbed SPAMTRACER that we introduced
in [47]. This large dataset is then mined by means of a multi-
stage scoring and ﬁltering process, whose results are enriched
using external data sources and clustered in order to reveal the
modus operandi of the attackers.

Before moving into the core of the paper, we would like

to make it clear what this paper is not about:

•

•

•

This paper does not offer yet another BGP hijack
detection technique. We do not want to incrementally
improve the state of the art in that space. The novelty,
at the contrary, resides in the identiﬁed hijacks and in
their detailed analysis.
Along the previous point, we do not claim that we
have found all BGP hijacks that could have been
found in our dataset. What matters is that our results
must be seen as a proof of the existence of these
recurring attacks. Some of them were conﬁrmed by
an ISP who was unwittingly involved in several hijack
cases apparently performed by a Russian spammer.
We believe that others are still hidden in our dataset.
However, ﬁguring out how to ﬁnd them all is left as
an exercise for future work.
This paper does not discuss the optimal choice of
the few parameters used in our algorithms. Running
a rigorous sensitivity analysis to further improve our
results is something we are working on. However, the
key contribution of this paper is not the method itself
but, instead, the identiﬁcation of real malicious attacks
routinely happening in the wild.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2
presents the related work. Section 3 describes the environ-
mental setup we have built, namely the data collection and
analysis processes. Section 4 is the core of the paper and
goes into the details of all the results obtained when using
this environment for several months. Section 5 offers some
insights on the effectiveness of current counter-measures to
defeat the attacks we have found. Section 6 summarizes the
lessons learned and concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORK

BGP hijacking defense solutions are twofold: (i) detection
techniques aim at monitoring the Internet routing infrastructure
and trigger alarms upon abnormal routing changes, and (ii)
other techniques aim at providing BGP with new mechanisms
to mitigate or prevent hijacking. Unlike hijack mitigation or
prevention techniques, detection methods require no changes to
router software, which usually makes them readily and easily
deployable.

Some techniques have been proposed to bring security
into BGP [24], [25], [30], usually using cryptography to sign
some elements of BGP updates to ensure routing information
authenticity and integrity. In the last few years a BGP security
framework relying on a RPKI [31] to secure IP preﬁx origina-
tion [24] has gained a lot of attention and is now progressively
being deployed.

Alternatively, some existing proposals [29], [26], [28], [34]
aim at detecting IP preﬁx hijacking by passively monitoring
the routing infrastructure. However due to the strong similar-
ity between IP preﬁx hijacking and some legitimate routing
changes those methods suffer from many false positives.

Other proposals [23], [40], [49], [50] leverage active prob-
ing of networks together with passive monitoring to improve
the detection by assessing the impact of BGP routing changes
on the data plane. In order to study BGP hijacking spammers
we use the SPAMTRACER methodology we introduced in [47]
for collecting a comprehensive set of routing-level features
about spam networks. In [38] Roughan et al. advocates that
neither BGP nor traceroute measurements were designed to
infer the AS-level connectivity of the Internet and capture the
complex inter-AS relationships, hence all results inferred from
such data can only be as accurate as the data. However, we try
to balance this limitation by setting up our own data collection
process allowing us to collect the most appropriate data for
studying the routing-level behavior of spammers.

In 2006, Ramachandran et al. [35] introduced a new phe-
nomenon called “BGP spectrum agility”, where they claimed
to have observed, over a period of a few months, spam from a
set of large (i.e., /8) previously unannounced IP address blocks
hijacked for a very short period of time (i.e., less than one
day). Later, Hu et al. [23] and Duan et al. [20] conﬁrmed
these observations. However, we have recently shown in [46]
through a practical case study that correlating BGP abnormal
events with malicious network trafﬁc is insufﬁcient to conclu-
sively identify malicious BGP hijacks. Meanwhile, Schlamp
et al. [39] described a unique case where a couple of IP
address blocks were hijacked for months to perform malicious
activities, such as spamming.

These few publications show the existence and the reality
of BGP hijacks in the wild but the scarcity of the attacks ob-
served since 2006 give the impression that this threat remains
highly anecdotal and that no infrastructure seems to have been
put in place by hackers to automatize efﬁciently, systemati-
cally, the launching of BGP hijacks. The results we present
here after will portray a very different situation in which,
every day, several BGP hijacks are taking place. Furthermore,
we show that this is by no means a new phenomenon. Our
data highlight that this has taken place for 18 months, without
anyone noticing it apparently.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

We have set up a comprehensive experimental environ-
ment
to study the BGP hijacking spammers phenomenon.
The complete setup is depicted in Figure 1. Our goal here
is to A collect routing data related to spam networks, B
extract from this data IP address blocks exhibiting an abnormal
routing behavior and retain the ones most likely indicating they
might result from a BGP hijack, C manually (in)validate each
candidate hijack by taking advantage of external data sources,
and ﬁnally D investigate the root cause behind some validated
malicious BGP hijacks to obtain new insights into hijacking
spammers behavior.

Our experimental setup builds upon SPAMTRACER [47],
a system designed for the collection and analysis of routing
data related to spam networks. The assumption behind this

2

and collecting BGP AS paths towards the spam network
from six RouteViews BGP collectors distributed worldwide.
Additionally, we map every IP-level hop in traceroutes to the
AS announcing it and further enrich the path with geolocation
information [3] and the registered holder [11] of each IP- and
AS-level hop traversed by a traceroute.

To summarize, every spam IP address block monitored over

7 consecutive days is associated with:

•

•

•

a set of daily IP/AS traceroute paths from our vantage
point to the network;
a set of daily BGP AS paths from the six Routeviews
BGP collectors to the network;
additional information on the geolocation and owner
of each intermediate IP- and AS-level hop in tracer-
outes.

B. Multi-stage scoring and data ﬁltering

As the amount of IP address blocks to monitor increased
signiﬁcantly over time, we needed a mechanism to automat-
ically investigate them. This is why we designed a multi-
stage scoring and ﬁltering system that analyzes the raw data,
identiﬁes abnormal routing events, assigns individual scores
based on a consistent set of criteria, and then aggregates all
scores to eventually highlight IP blocks most likely indicating
possible BGP hijacks. We describe here the main components
of this multi-stage scoring and ﬁltering system.
1) Traceroute and BGP anomaly scoring:

In [47] we
introduced a set of heuristics that proved to be effective at
identifying BGP and Traceroute anomalies. With the limited
data we had at our disposal at that time (April-Sep 2011),
this approach had only unveiled a limited number of cases
involving a few IP blocks being hijacked. In this paper, we
apply it to a much larger dataset and reveal a signiﬁcantly
larger amount of successful hijacks.

(I) BGP anomalies provide a view from the control plane
on the routing behavior of monitored networks and are ex-
tracted from the set of daily BGP AS paths. (I.a) A BGP origin
anomaly refers to an IP address block being announced by
more than one AS. Such anomaly is also commonly referred
to as a Multiple Origin AS (MOAS) conﬂict. (I.b) A BGP
AS path deviation measures the difference observed between
BGP AS paths collected from a given BGP collector towards
a given IP address block.

(II) Traceroute anomalies are used to assess the impact
of control plane routing changes on the data plane. They are
extracted from the set of daily IP/AS traceroute paths. (II.a) An
IP/AS reachability anomaly refers to a permanent change in the
reachability of the probed destination host or AS. (II.b) A Hop
count anomaly quantiﬁes a possible permanent change in the
length of traceroutes. (II.c) An IP-level traceroute deviation
and an AS-level traceroute deviation measure the difference
observed between respectively IP-level traceroutes and AS-
level traceroutes. (II.d) A Geographical deviation quantiﬁes
the difference observed between the countries traversed by
traceroutes.

Fig. 1. Experimental environment.

approach is that when an IP address block is hijacked for
stealthy spamming then a routing change will be observed
when the block is released by the spammer to remain stealthy.
Since we start monitoring a network when we receive spam
from it, we look for a routing change from the hijacked state of
the network to the normal state of the network. The goal here
is not to build a stand-alone BGP hijack detection system but
instead to collect, in real-time, routing data associated with
spam networks in order to identify spammers sending spam
from temporarily (i.e., less than one day) hijacked IP address
blocks as described in [35]. In the remainder of this section we
describe the different parts of our experimental environment in
more details.

A. Routing data collection

1) Spam IP address block selection: Our primary dataset is
a live feed of spam emails collected at spamtraps. Every day
we receive about 3,500,000 spam emails from about 24,000
distinct IP address blocks. Due to the overhead imposed by
traceroute measurements and by querying the BGP collectors,
our system can currently monitor about 8,000 IP address
blocks on a daily basis. A sample of IP address blocks is
extracted from the spam feed every hour. When selecting
blocks to monitor we prioritize the recently announced ones as
they are good candidates for short-lived hijacks as suggested
in [35]. We consider to be recently announced any IP address
block in our spam dataset that became routed within the last
24 hours, based on archived routing information bases (RIBs)
from RouteViews and RIPE RIS.

2) Traceroute and BGP monitoring: We monitor each spam
IP address block during seven days by launching traceroutes

As described in [47], every anomaly type is quantiﬁed
with a score in [0, 1]. A BGP origin anomaly is deﬁned by a

3

RouteViewsSpamtrapsBGPfeedLivespamfeedRIRsA.1 Spam IP address block selectionA.2 Traceroute & BGP Monitoring        Routing data collectionATraceroute and BGP dataIRR dumpsRIB dumpsSpamhaus DROPB.1 Traceroute & BGP anomaly scoring   B.2 Multi-stage aggregation and ﬁlteringMulti-stage scoring and data ﬁlteringBExternal cross-examinationValidation of candidate hijacksCClustering of malicious BGP hijacksRoot cause analysisDHijack campaignsMalicious BGP hijacksCandidate hijacksArchivestriplet (IP, AS1, AS2) where IP is the monitored IP address
block and AS1 and AS2 are the ASes announcing IP . In
case an IP address block is announced by more than two
ASes, several BGP origin anomalies can be produced. Path
deviations are computed using the Jaccard index1 on the sets
(pd, pd+1) where pd is a path collected on day d and pd+1
is a path collected on day d + 1. Finally, IP/AS reachability
anomalies and the hop count anomaly are computed once for
all traceroutes collected for a spam network. In summary, a
network monitored for n days produces (i) zero or more BGP
origin anomalies, (ii) c × (n − 1) path deviations for each
anomaly type where c is the number of collectors (c = 1 for
traceroutes and c = 6 for BGP AS paths) and (iii) zero or one
IP/AS reachability and hop count anomalies.

2) Multi-stage aggregation and ﬁltering: In [47] we used a
decision tree to compute a global suspiciousness score on the
monitored IP blocks, based on various predeﬁned combinations
of routing anomalies. Thanks to the analytical experience we
gained by investigating a large number of candidate hijack
cases, we have further enhanced our anomaly scoring and
ﬁltering method by replacing the ad-hoc decision tree with
a multi-stage aggregation system relying on Multi-Criteria
Decision Analysis (MCDA) techniques. This new MCDA-
based approach turns out to be more ﬂexible, as well as easier
to implement and maintain than a large set of ad-hoc rules. It is
also more effective at assigning a global suspiciousness score
to any given IP address block monitored by SPAMTRACER
because it removes the need to deﬁne intermediate decision
thresholds and allows to identify suspicious routing behaviors
likely resulting from a BGP hijack in a more ﬁne-grained
fashion.

MCDA provides an extensive set of methods to model
simple to very complex decision schemes, ranging from basic
averaging functions to more advanced methods such as fuzzy
integrals [17]. In our decision-making system, we rely mainly
on the Weighted Ordered Weighted Average (WOWA) opera-
tor [45] to aggregate the different individual anomaly scores at
various levels. The choice of using WOWA was motivated by
a trade-off between ﬂexibility and complexity of the decision
model. In fact, WOWA combines the advantages of two types
of averaging functions: the weighted mean (WM) and the
ordered weighted average (OWA). This enables a decision
maker to quantify, with a single operator, the reliability of the
information sources (as WM does) but also to weight the indi-
vidual scores according to their relative ordering. This sorting
and weighted ordering aspects allow us to emphasize various
distributions of scores (e.g., eliminate outliers, emphasize mid-
range values, ensure that “at least x” or “most of” the scores
are signiﬁcantly high, etc).

Obviously, like any other unsupervised technique (i.e., in
absence of reliable “ground truth” data), a number of parame-
ters must be deﬁned – usually based on the acquired expertise
and domain knowledge – to accurately model a decision
scheme and ensure that the most relevant cases are ranked
in the top tier, whereas truly benign cases are assigned very
low scores. In the case of WOWA, we only have to specify two
different weighting vectors, which already simpliﬁes consider-

1The Jaccard index J of two sets S1 and S2 measures the amount of overlap

between the two sets and is deﬁned as J =

|S1∩S2|
|S1∪S2| .

ably the parameter selection phase. This said, it is important
to stress that the primary goal of our multi-stage scoring and
ﬁltering approach is to narrow down, as much as possible,
the number of cases and be able to focus on a limited set of
most promising BGP hijack candidates, which can be further
validated through manual investigation. Recall that the ultimate
goal is to prove whether (i) “BGP spectrum agility” still exists
and (ii) the modus of BGP hijacking spammers has changed
since 2006 [35]. In other words, we try to understand if this is
a problem still worth of consideration in 2014, or not. Under
these considerations, and without discrediting the importance
of parameters selection, we argue that the determination of the
optimal parameters for our decision model is, at this stage, not
critical to achieving our goals.

We refer the interested reader to the Appendix to learn
more details on the mathematical background behind our
MCDA scoring and aggregation system as well as its param-
eters.

C. Validation of candidate hijacks

Due to the lack of ground truth information and the
limitations of routing data alone to identify instances of BGP
hijacks, an additional validation is required and consists in
collecting additional evidence, usually involving some manual
processing, about candidate hijacks to help conﬁrm them
or not. We (in)validate candidate hijacks using, besides the
collected routing data, daily archives of the following external
data sources:

•

•

•

•

Routing Information Base (RIB) dumps from RIPE
RIS [8] and Routeviews [14] consist of snapshots of
routers routing table providing the list of announced
IP address blocks and associated BGP AS paths.
Internet Routing Registry (IRR) dumps [5] pro-
vide registration information on IP address and AS
number holders as well as possible routing policies
established between interconnected networks (i.e., via
BGP import and export rules).
Spamhaus Don’t Route Or Peer (DROP) [10] is a
blacklist of IP address blocks allegedly controlled by
cybercriminals, including some claimed to have been
stolen from their legitimate owner.
Network operational mailing lists, such as [7], [9],
are sometimes used by network operators to report
BGP hijack incidents (e.g.,
the Link Telecom hi-
jack [16]).

We examine the routing history related to candidate hijacked IP
address ranges to study their routing characteristics including
(i) when they were publicly announced, (ii) the BGP origin
ASes used to advertise them, and (iii) the upstream provider
ASes seen in the AS paths. Because our data collection system
only collects routing information about IP address ranges for a
limited period of time, we built the routing history of candidate
hijacked IP address ranges from the archived dumps of routing
information bases (RIBs).

We leverage IRR dumps to identify the country of reg-
istration and, the name and the contact details of the owner
of IP address blocks and AS numbers involved in candidate

4

hijacks. We use this information to assess the legitimacy of
routing announcements and proﬁle IP address block and AS
number holders, e.g., to determine whether the owner of an
IP address block is also the owner of the originating AS or to
determine whether the owner of an announced IP address block
is still in business. As suggested in [41], we further assess the
consistency of inter-AS links observed in BGP AS paths using
the published routing policies when available. We consider an
inter-AS link consistent if both AS refer to each other in their
declared import/export rules.

We use feedback from the Spamhaus DROP list that is
a subset of SBL consisting of "IP address blocks that are
hijacked or leased by professional spam or cybercriminal
operations" [10].

Finally, in order to facilitate the communication among
network operators in the Internet, the operational community
uses public mailing lists, such as the North American Network
Operators’ Group (NANOG) mailing list [7] or the RIPE
Working Groups mailing lists [9]. We check our candidate
hijack cases against reported routing incidents in the archives
of these two mailing lists.

At the end of this stage, we should be left with a set of
hijack cases that should allow us to conﬁrm or not2 that BGP
hijacks as described in [35] are still ongoing and, if yes, what
their characteristics are.

D. Root cause analysis

While the external cross-validation of candidate hijacks
described here above should increase our conﬁdence in the
existence of BGP spectrum agility spammers in the real world,
we wanted to conﬁrm our results by further investigating the
root causes of the validated hijacks from a spam campaign per-
spective. Assuming we could identify good candidate hijacks
that are perfectly matching the anomalous routing behavior
of BGP spectrum agility spammers, one would expect that
spam campaigns launched from these hijacked networks, by
the same group of agile spammers, should intuitively share
also a number of commonalities with respect to spam features
(e.g., advertised URI’s, sender’s address, etc).

We have thus used a multi-criteria clustering framework
called TRIAGE [42] to identify series of spam emails sent from
different hijacked IP address blocks that seem to be part of a
campaign orchestrated by the same agile spammers. TRIAGE
is a software framework for security data mining that relies
on intelligent data fusion algorithms to reliably group events
or entities likely linked to the same root cause. Thanks to
a multi-criteria clustering approach, it can identify complex
patterns and varying relationships among groups of events
within a dataset. TRIAGE is best described as a security tool
designed for intelligence extraction and attack investigation,
helping analysts to determine the patterns and behaviors of
the intruders and typically used to highlight how they operate.
This novel clustering approach has demonstrated its utility in
the context of other security investigations, e.g., rogue AV
campaigns [18], spam botnets [44] and targeted attacks [43].

2Disclaimer: We acknowledge that some inadequacies in the data exist
leading to false positives. Nevertheless, as shown later, the pattern coming
out of our dataset builds to a very compelling case.

Fig. 2. Clustering spam emails sent from hijacked networks using TRIAGE.

Figure 2 illustrates the TRIAGE workﬂow, as applied to
our spam dataset. In step x, a number of email characteristics
(or features) are selected and deﬁned as decision criteria for
linking related spam emails. Such characteristics include the
sender IP address, the email subject, the sending date, the
advertised URL’s and associated domains and whois regis-
tration information. In step y, TRIAGE builds relationships
among all email samples with respect to selected features
using appropriate similarity metrics. For text-based features
(e.g., subject, email addresses), we used string-oriented simi-
larity measures commonly-used in information retrieval, such
as the Levenshtein similarity and N-gram similarity [27].
However, other similarity metrics may be deﬁned to match
the feature type and be consistent
to analyst expectations
(e.g., Jaccard to measure similarity between sets, or a custom
IP addresses similarity metric that is based on their relative
inter-distance in the binary space).

At step z, the individual feature similarities are fused using
an aggregation model reﬂecting a high-level behavior deﬁned
by the analyst, who can impose, e.g., that some portion of
highly similar email features (out of n available) must be
satisﬁed to assign different samples to the same campaign
(regardless of which ones). Similarly to the WOWA aggrega-
tion method explained here above, in TRIAGE we can assign
different weights to individual features, so as to give higher or
lower importance to certain features. For this analysis we gave
more importance to the source IP addresses, domain names
associated to spam URL’s and whois registration names, since
we anticipate that a combination of these features convey a
sense and possible evidence of colluding spam activities.

As outcome (step {), TRIAGE identiﬁes multi-dimensional
clusters (called MDC’s), which in this analysis are clusters
of spam emails in which any pair of emails is linked by
a number of common traits, yet not necessarily always the
same. As explained in [42], a decision threshold can be chosen
such that undesired linkage between attacks are eliminated,
i.e., to drop any irrelevant connection that could result from
a combination of small values or an insufﬁcient number of
correlated features.

IV. RESULTS

We now turn to the description of our results, by detailing
step-by-step the outcome of every component of our experi-
mental environment in Figure 1. We ﬁnish with a thorough
investigation and validation of the candidate malicious BGP
hijacks we have identiﬁed.

5

ΣPer$feature Graph$based/clustering/Mul6$Criteria Aggrega6on/Spam/Emails///URI/Subject/IP/Feature/Selec6on/1"2"3"Model/Spam/Campaigns/Cluster/Visualiza6on/4"Statistic

Jan 2013-Jun 2014

Nr of distinct IP address blocks
Nr of distinct ASes
Nr of traceroutes
Nr of BGP viewpoints
Nr of BGP AS paths

391,444
18,252
5,594,164
6
25,679,725

TABLE I.

SUMMARY OF THE BGP AND TRACEROUTE DATASET.

Fig. 3. BGP hijack identiﬁcation: scores between January 2013 and June
2014.

A. Data collection results

We consider a dataset of BGP and traceroute data collected
between January 2013 and June 2014 (1.5 years). A summary
of the dataset is provided in Table I.

During 18 months we monitored a total of 391,444 distinct
IP address blocks which sent spam to our spamtraps. These
networks were operated from 18,252 different ASes. Finally,
more than 5.5M data plane measurements and about 25.6M
BGP routes towards these networks were collected.

B. Multi-stage scoring and ﬁltering results

Figure 3 shows the distribution of scores for the monitored
spam networks. The ﬁrst part of the curve between the score
value 0 and approximately 0.25 corresponds to 31.29% of
spam networks exhibiting almost no variability in collected
BGP routes and traceroutes. These are very likely benign
cases. 68.60% of spam networks have a score between 0.25
and 0.75. Networks in that category usually exhibit a set of
various anomalies, which makes them hard to attribute to a
benign or malicious routing behavior. They may suffer from
limitations of the aggregation model or from inaccuracies in
the collected data [32], which, in the case of a benign routing
behavior, mistakenly increases the suspiciousness score and, in
the case of a malicious routing behavior, prevents it from being
correctly extracted by our scoring system. Finally, 0.11% of
monitored spam IP address blocks have a score higher than
0.75 and correspond to the most likely hijacked networks.

There are 437 different IP address blocks which exhibit a
score higher than 0.75. Each of them was monitored only once
during the 18 months of the experiment.

C. Validation of candidate hijack results

We leverage here the methodology presented in Sec-
tion III-C to (in)validate uncovered candidate hijacks. Due

6

to the large amount of time required to manually investi-
gate cases, we focused our analysis on the 437 spam IP
address blocks that scored above 0.75 in our multi-stage
scoring and ﬁltering system, i.e., the upper quartile in the
scoring distribution. Manual in-depth analysis of these 437
cases reveals that 373 of them are benign cases for one of
the following reasons. First, most benign cases correspond
to networks which disappear from the routing tables for a
few hours to several days while the network is monitored
and reappear after the network stopped being monitored thus
creating different anomalies. This result is due to a limitation of
our system, which monitors networks for a limited time period
of seven days. Second, other cases were mistakenly ﬂagged
as suspicious due to inaccuracies in traceroute measurements,
such as traceroutes cluttered with many non-responsive IP
hops ("*"). Consequently, we concluded that 64 cases out of
437 were found to have likely been hijacked3 for the reasons
detailed below.

We found out that all these 64 remaining cases shared a
common routing behavior: they appeared to be routed during
the ﬁrst one to six days of the monitoring period and then
permanently disappeared from the routing tables. As a result
all these cases exhibit similar routing anomalies triggered by
the signiﬁcant difference in control plane and data plane routes
at the time and after the block was routed.

64 IP address ranges were found to have been hijacked
between January 2013 and June 2014. After examining the
routing history of these blocks, we could classify them further
into two different categories:

•

•

PREFIX HIJACK VIA VALID UPSTREAM: In 92% of the
hijacks, the IP address ranges were allocated but (1)
unannounced by the time they were hijacked (i.e., left
idle by their valid owner), and the attacker forged part
of the BGP AS path to advertise the IP ranges using
an (2) invalid BGP origin AS via a (3) valid direct
upstream provider (ﬁrst hop) AS.
AS HIJACK VIA ROGUE UPSTREAM: In 8% of the
hijacks, the IP address ranges were allocated but (1)
unannounced and the attacker forged part of the BGP
AS path to advertise the IP address ranges using the
(4) valid BGP origin AS but via an (5) invalid direct
upstream provider (ﬁrst hop) AS.

(1) Unannounced IP address space: The routing history
revealed that all hijacked preﬁxes were unannounced before
being hijacked.
(2)-(4) (In)valid BGP origin AS: In this work, we consider
the origin AS for an IP address range as valid if the IP address
range is mapped to the origin AS in the IRRs (whois) and
the IP address range owner is also the same as the origin AS
owner.
(3)-(5) (In)valid direct upstream provider AS: In this work,
we consider as invalid the AS a1 appearing as the direct
upstream provider of the origin AS a0 in the BGP AS path
{an, ..., a1, a0} if all the following conditions are met: (1) it
has never been used as a direct upstream provider AS for

3Disclaimer: In the remainder of the paper, for the sake of conciseness, we
talk about hijacks and attacker instead of candidate hijacks and likely attacker
even though we have no bullet proof evidence of their wrong doing.

0.00.250.50.751Score0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFa0 in the past, (2) it does not appear in the list of provider
ASes of a0 and does not have a0 in the list of its customers
(i.e., imports/exports) published in the whois when such
information was provided, (3) it is not used as an upstream
provider to advertise any non hijacked IP address range at the
time it is observed in the hijacks, (4) it is unused when it is
observed for the ﬁrst time in hijacks, (5) its holder refers to an
inactive organisation, and (6) it has been reported as suspicious
by Spamhaus4.

it

In the AS hijack cases,

thus appears that attackers
actually forged part of the BGP AS path ({a1, a0}) by unau-
thorisedly using a1 and a0 in the BGP announcements for the
different hijacked IP preﬁxes. BGP hijacking using a forged
AS path is a stealthy BGP hijack technique [23], [39] and
was probably used by the attackers in an effort not to raise
suspicion.

We also mined archives of the NANOG [7] and RIPE
Working Groups [9] mailing lists for public reports related
to ASes or IP address blocks identiﬁed in our hijacks. We
found only one thread [4] reporting the hijack of the block
91.220.85.0/24 and its legitimate BGP origin AS51888 via the
invalid direct upstream provider AS42989.

We further observed that the 64 hijacked IP address blocks
were advertised from only seven invalid distinct BGP ori-
gin ASes (preﬁx hijacks) and via only three invalid distinct
upstream ASes (AS hijacks). Based on this observation we
used the archived routing information bases (RIBs) from
RouteViews and RIPE RIS to extract all IP address ranges
originated by the same seven invalid BGP origin ASes or
advertised via the same three invalid upstream provider ASes
during the same 18 month time period. Surprisingly no less
than 2,591 additional IP ranges were uncovered, all of them
matching the exact same hijack signature as the other 64 IP
address blocks. While we observed spam coming from the 64
hijacked IP address ranges identiﬁed by our system, we did not
ﬁnd any spam sent from the new 2,591 ranges in our spamtrap
logs. In the remainder of this section we thus investigate a total
of 2,655 IP address ranges supposedly hijacked between
January 2013 and June 2014.

Figure 4 shows the distribution of the 2,655 observed
hijacks across time. We can see that 95.3% of the observed
hijacks have occurred after July 2013. From that point the
distribution becomes almost uniform, showing that hijacks
were performed on a regular basis for more than one year.
With an average of 4.82 hijacks per day, we note that BGP
hijacks have been an ongoing and recurring threat in the past
18 months (and possibly before or after).

We now focus on another key characteristic of the identiﬁed
hijacks: their duration. In [35] Ramachandran et al. report
on spam coming from IP preﬁxes involved in BGP routing
announcements lasting less than one day. In our case, 85.5%
lasted less than one day, from 29 minutes to 23 hours 47
minutes, 94.6% lasted no more than 2 days and 98.7% lasted
no more than one week. A large fraction of hijacks are thus

4Spamhaus SBL records related to some identiﬁed hijacked IP address
blocks are available at http://www.spamhaus.org/sbl/query/SBL<record_id>:
96354, 175835, 177177, 177452, 177570, 179312, 180606, 182044, 182223,
182351, 183715, 183836, 184596, 184865, 185726, 185728, 217199. Note
that records are purged when the cases are considered to be solved.

7

Fig. 4. The number of hijacked IP address ranges observed between January
2013 and June 2014. Most of the observed hijacks occurred after July 2013.

similar in duration to those reported in [35], i.e., less than one
day. All in all the majority of hijacks are rather short-lived.
Additionally, 1.3% of hijacks are long-lived, i.e., lasted more
than one week in our observations, with a maximum duration
of 8 months and 20 days.

Though short-lived and long-lived hijacks share some
characteristics, we consider them to be due to two distinct
phenomena. In fact, short-lived hijacks can be used by an
attacker to circumvent traceback and avoid blacklisting by
hopping between IP addresses in a range until the range itself
gets blacklisted and then move to another range. Long-lived
hijacks however make it harder for the attacker to remain
undetected. We prove this later when checking the list of
hijacked IP address ranges against several blacklists. Such
long-lived hijacks have already been observed in the wild,
for instance in 2011 a couple of IP preﬁxes belonging to
the company Link Telecom were hijacked for 5 months and
used to perform various malicious activities such as sending
spam and hosting services but also exploiting remote hosts and
originating suspicious IRC trafﬁc [39].

In the remainder of this Section we investigate short-lived
(≤ 1 week) and long-lived (> 1 week) hijacks separately to
emphasize their similarities and differences. We consider the
following characteristics of a hijack event:

•

•

•

•

•

(C.1) Whether spam emails were received from the IP
address range at our spamtraps and/or spam sources
were blacklisted for the IP address range in Spamhaus
SBL or DROP (Don’t Route Or Peer) [10], Ucepro-
tect [13] or Manitu [6].
(C.2) The duration of the unadvertised period of
the IP preﬁx, which corresponds to the amount of time
elapsed between the last time it was announced and
the moment it was hijacked.
(C.3) The registration date of the IP address range,
which is the date at which it was allocated or assigned
by a Regional Internet Registry (RIR) to an Internet
Service Provider (ISP) or end-user (e.g., a company).
(C.4) The size of the IP address range, which deﬁnes
the number of individual IP addresses available in the
range.
(C.5) Whether the owner of the IP address block is
still in business.

Jan 2013Mar 2013May 2013Jul 2013Sep 2013Nov 2013Jan 2014Mar 2014May 20140.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF - Number of IP prefixes(C.3) The 35 long-lived hijacked IP address blocks were
mostly registered after 2000. It is noteworthy that at the time
they were hijacked, these ranges were all properly registered
IP address blocks assigned to an organisation. None of them
was part of “bogon” IP address blocks, i.e., IP addresses that
should not be announced on the Internet [11].

(C.4) In [35], Ramachandran et al. claimed to have ob-
served spam from large (i.e., /8) hijacked IP address blocks.
In our 35 long-lived hijack cases, the IP address blocks were
smaller than what was claimed in previous studies, i.e., the
largest was a /19 and the smallest was a /24.

(C.5) The analysis of whois records for long-lived hi-
jacked IP address blocks revealed that most of the 35 blocks
refer to organisations that are apparently out of business. This
observation indicates that attackers might speciﬁcally target
unannounced IP address space whose registrant does not exist
anymore, for instance when a company is dissolved, acquired
by or merged into another one. In some cases, its IP address
blocks may be left unused.

Last but not

least, we managed to get feedback from
an ISP unwittingly involved in 23 out of the 35 long-lived
hijacks. After investigation on their side, the ISP conﬁrmed
these attacks had taken place and were performed by one
of their customers, without
initially. The
elements we provided corroborated their observations, and
the ISP has since then terminated his peering contract with
the misbehaving AS owner.

them noticing it

2) Short-lived hijacks

In this Section we focus our analysis on the 2,620
short-lived hijacks (out of
the total 2,655 hijacks). We
further distinguish two episodes in these short-lived hijacks:
(1) spam and blacklisted spam sources related to hijacked
networks observed between February and May 2013 and (2)
an interesting hijack phenomenon observed between June
2013 and June 2014, showing a striking and unusual temporal
pattern in the BGP announcements. We ﬁrst present these two
episodes and their differences with respect to characteristic
C.1. Afterwards, we describe their commonalities in terms of
the other characteristics C.2-5.

Episode 1: From February until May 2013

(C.1) Out of 2,620 short-lived hijacked IP preﬁxes, 58
have sent spam emails to our spamtraps between February and
May 2013. Figure 6 shows the BGP announcements, spam and
blacklisted spam sources related to a sample of 25 out of 58
short-lived hijacked IP preﬁxes. The ﬁgure highlights:

•

•

the strong temporal correlation between BGP an-
nouncements and spam, and
the low number of IP address blocks (7 out of 58)
blacklisted by Spamhaus before the end of the hijack.

A total of 4,149 spam emails were received from the short-
lived hijacked IP address blocks. We extracted from this
spam all advertised URLs that were pointing to 1,174 unique

Fig. 5.
BGP announcements, spam emails and blacklisted spam sources
related to long-lived hijacked IP address ranges. For the sake of conciseness,
only the 10 out of 35 IP address ranges that sent spam to our spamtraps or
were blacklisted are depicted.

1) Long-lived hijacks

In this section we analyse more closely the 35 long-lived
hijacks (out of the total 2,655 hijacks) we identiﬁed according
to the ﬁve characteristics described above.

(C.1) Figure 5(5) shows the spam and blacklisted spam
sources along with BGP announcements related to long-lived
hijacked IP preﬁxes. Since those IP preﬁxes were not an-
nounced before or after being hijacked, the BGP announce-
ments shown here all relate to the time of the hijacks. We
can see that six out of 35 IP address ranges sent spam to
our spamtraps. A total of 815 spam emails were sent from IP
addresses scattered throughout each of the long-lived hijacked
IP address blocks. Spam was mainly received at the start of
the hijack period. No IP source was found to be blacklisted at
the time the spam was received.
networks

and
91.198.40.0/24) out of
the 35 became blacklisted by
Spamhaus within two days after they became hijacked and
we observed spam originating from them. In these cases,
blacklists appear to have reacted quickly. Four additional
networks which have not sent spam to our spamtraps also
became blacklisted, although it took more time for them to
appear on a blacklist. For two of them (61.45.251.0/24 and
115.85.133.0/24) it took 2 weeks and the hijack was over
by the time they appeared on a blacklist. For the other two
(91.220.63.0/24 and 192.12.131.0/24) it took one month and
2 months respectively before they appeared on a blacklist.

(193.138.172.0/22

However,

two

(C.2) 26 IP preﬁxes out of 35 were never announced on the
Internet before they were hijacked. The 9 others were hijacked
on average one year after remaining unadvertised for at least
one day, and maximum three years and two months.

5Disclaimer: IP address blocks and ASes were likely abused in hijacks
between January 2013 and June 2014 and, therefore, might now be legitimately
used.

8

Episode 2: From June 2013 until June 2014

While examining the short-lived hijacks in the ﬁrst pe-
riod, we uncovered an intriguing phenomenon in the hijacks
performed during the second period, between June 2013 and
June 2014. This phenomenon is signiﬁcant since it includes
2,562 short-lived hijacks representing 97.8% of all short-lived
hijacks identiﬁed. Figure 7 depicts a sample of 87 (out of
2,562) hijacks that occurred in June 2014 and shows that:

•

•

all hijacks are actually performed by groups of two to
four preﬁxes, starting and ending at the same time;
during the 13 months period there are always, at any
point in time, at least two IP preﬁxes hijacked.

Although only part of the phenomenon is depicted in Figure 7,
it
is recurrent and persistant over the complete 13 month
period, between June 2013 and June 2014(6). This strongly
indicates that they may have been performed with the same
modus operandi. The fact that some groups of hijacks start
only seconds after the end of previous groups further suggests
that they might be carried out in an automated way, possibly
also relying on some automated process to ﬁnd target network
address blocks to hijack.

(C.1) Strangely enough, we have not been able to ﬁnd any
malicious trafﬁc associated with those hijacked IP address
blocks. The absence of spam and other scam-related trafﬁc in
our data may be due to incomplete visibility into malicious
activities associated with these networks, or could indicate
that this is a moving infrastructure to host servers, e.g., C&C
servers. We have currently no conclusive evidence to validate
this conjecture, though.

Common characteristics of episodes 1 and 2

In this section, we analyze common characteristics of all

2,620 short-lived hijacks.

(C.2) Figure 8 presents the duration of the unadvertised
period of all short-lived hijacked networks. 2,261 IP preﬁxes
(86.3%) were never announced before they were hijacked.
From an informal discussion with a RIPE NCC executive [19]
it is apparently common practice for network operators to
register and use publicly routable IP address blocks for internal
network infrastructure. This could explain why no route to such
block can be found in our BGP feed. Apart from this reason we
are not aware of any other reason why IP address blocks are
registered but never actually announced. The remaining 359
networks were last announced from 6 days to 4 years before
being hijacked with a average of 24.6 months and a median
of 24.5 months. With 72.4% of IP preﬁxes left unannounced
for more than one year we can conclude that attackers mostly
hijack networks left unannounced for a long period of time.
(C.3) It appears that 1,775 IP address ranges (67.8%) out
of 2,620 were registered before 1997 when the RIRs started
taking on the registration of IP address resources and setting
up the IRRs. Network address ranges registered before 1997

6The ﬁgure depicting the complete phenomenon of episode 2 is available

at http://bit.ly/ndss2015_bgphijacks_episode2.

Fig. 6. Episode 1 of short-lived hijacks between February and May 2013:
temporal correlation of BGP announcements, spam emails and blacklisted
spam sources related to hijacked IP address ranges. For the sake of concise-
ness, only a sample of 25 out of 58 IP address ranges are depicted.

domain names, resolving to IP addresses belonging to the same
hijacked IP address blocks, showing that some IP addresses
were used in parallel to send spam and host the advertised
scam websites. From whois information, we observed that
these domain names were usually created within a few days
before the networks being hijacked. This shows that attackers,
very likely, control the entire IP address blocks and take full
advantage of them.

Furthermore, spam emails collected by our spamtraps
are enriched with the name of the spambot associated with
the spam, by taking advantage of CBL signatures [2]. Spam
emails sent from the supposedly hijacked IP address blocks
we uncovered were not associated with any known spam
botnet and thus must have been sent using another type
of spamming infrastructure, instead of the traditional spam
botnets. This is consistent with BGP spectrum agility where
spammers need to set up a dedicated infrastructure with their
own machines so that they can be assigned the hijacked IP
addresses.

9

Fig. 8. The duration of the unadvertised period for 13.7% of the short-lived
hijacked IP address ranges. The remaining 86.3% of IP address ranges were
never announced before being hijacked.

Finally, 770 out of the 2,620 short-lived hijacks were
later conﬁrmed by an ISP, unwittingly involved in these
attacks. After receiving a lot of complains for spam, the ISP
discovered that one of their customers was indeed announcing
IP address blocks he did not own, which were indeed used
for nefarious activities as conﬁrmed by our observations. The
ISP has now terminated their contract with the misbehaving
customer (who turned out to be colluding with a spammer
apparently based in Russia).

D. Root cause analysis results

In the previous section we have uncovered strong evidence
of BGP spectrum agility occurring in the Internet. However, we
have not systematically analysed if the identiﬁed hijacks are
isolated attacks or if some of them share a common root cause,
as we would expect if they are part of campaigns orchestrated
by the same spammers. This is why we have run the TRIAGE
clustering tool against all spam emails coming from the 64
supposedly hijacked IP address blocks which have sent spam
to our spamtraps.

The multi-criteria clustering tool has identiﬁed only 30
multi-dimensional clusters (MDC’s) in which spam emails
are correlated by various combinations of features. Because
of the way these clusters are generated, we anticipate they
likely represent different campaigns organized by the same
individuals - as spam emails within the same cluster share
several common traits. Thus 64 preﬁxes were used to run
30 different spam campaigns. In the following we will show
that some campaigns are rather short-lived and run from a
single preﬁx whereas others last for several days relying on a
number of different preﬁxes. Table II provides global statistics
computed across all MDC’s. Most spam campaigns seem to be
short-lived (lasting on average only a couple of days), except
two MDCs that existed for more than 30 days.

By clustering spam emails into campaigns, we obtain new
insights into hijacking spammers behavior. From the structure
of MDCs, we uncover three key modus operandi of hijacking
spammers: (1) 10 campaigns (out of 30) involve a single
hijacked IP preﬁx that is not abused elsewhere in any other
campaign, (2) 17 campaigns involve a single hijacked IP preﬁx,
yet the hijacked preﬁx is abused concurrently in different spam
campaigns, and (3) three campaigns were observed abusing
multiple hijacked IP preﬁxes sequentially over a longer period

Fig. 7. Episode 2 of short-lived hijacks between June 2013 and June 2014:
hijacks are always performed by groups of at least two IP preﬁxes. For the
sake of conciseness, only a sample of 87 (out of 2,562) IP address ranges
hijacked in June 2014 are depicted.

can thus sometimes be poorly documented and, for that reason,
has been considered to be a target of choice for spammers to
hijack them [22], [33]. This idea appears to be supported by
our data.

(C.4) Short-lived hijacked IP address blocks include /17’s,
/21’s, /22’s, /23’s and (92.6%) /24’s, similar to the long-lived
ones. Although those hijacks look like the ones Ramachandran
et al. in [35] reported, the average size of hijacked address
blocks is very different, namely /24, instead of /8.

(C.5) The analysis of whois records (from IRR databases)
of short-lived hijacked networks revealed that all IP address
blocks were, at the time they were hijacked, properly registered
blocks assigned to an organisation with sometimes multiple
blocks referring to the same organisation. Although we could
not check all 2,620 IP address blocks, we looked at 100 of
them and determined that 41% refer to organisations that are
apparently out of business but, interestingly, 59% refer to
organisations that appear to be still in business.

10

01020304050Unadvertised period (in months)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF - Number of IP prefixes   Statistic

Nr of spam emails
Nr of IP preﬁxes
Nr of URL hosting server IP addresses
Nr of URL domain names
Nr of URL domain name whois registrants
Nr of spam subjects
Nr of active days
Lifetime in days
Compactness

Avg

141.8
1.6
7.3
10.3
44.5
47.7
5.7
5.7
0.43

Med Min Max

11.5

1
4
2
6.5
7
1
1

0.43

2
1
1
1
1
2
1
1

0.27

1,178

12
24
173
556
455
24
81
0.74

TABLE II.

GLOBAL STATISTICS FOR THE 30 MD-CLUSTERS (SPAM

CAMPAIGNS).

of time. While the ﬁrst two phenomena actually conﬁrmed
our intuition about the anticipated behavior of this class of
spammers, the latter phenomenon is the most interesting as
it conﬁrms the existence of BGP spectrum agility in the
form of campaigns of BGP hijacks orchestrated by the same
spammers. Indeed, it highlights the existence of a more agile
and sophisticated modus operandi of spammers capable of
hijacking and abusing multiple IP preﬁxes, and subsequently
hopping from one hijacked IP preﬁx to another to distribute
spam. This agility enables them to send spam in a more
stealthy manner and thus stay undetected “under the radar”.

Finally, from Table II we also observe a higher variability
in spam email subjects and whois registrant addresses, sug-
gesting that spammers have automated tools at their disposal
to facilitate the creation of new email templates and automate
the registration of new domains used for disposable “one-time
URL’s”.

Figure 9(7) shows a graph visualization of one of the large-
scale campaigns that involved multiple hijacked IP preﬁxes,
which illustrates the typical modus operandi of agile spammers
operating such stealthy campaigns. In this particular example,
we can observe the following key points:

•

•

•

over 662 spam emails have been sent from 12 different
hijacked IP preﬁxes (yellow nodes), each of them
used in turn by spammers to distribute spam using
a bunch of one-time URL’s, most of them including
domain names (blue nodes) registered at ENOM (large
pink node) using privacy-protected email addresses
provided by whoisprivacyprotect.com (red nodes);
spam advertised content (domain URL’s) share the
same server IP addresses (lightgrey nodes);
the campaign has a lifetime of 84 days, yet only 24
active days (purple nodes laid out in a clockwise fash-
ion), during which spammers are hopping from one
hijacked IP preﬁx to another, which is an effective way
of circumventing IP-based spam ﬁlters and reputation
systems.

To the best of our knowledge, these results are completely
novel and shed a new light on the behavior of agile BGP
hijacking spammers. First, we observe that stealthy spam
campaigns can be performed by exploiting multiple hijacked

IP address blocks. Secondly, we observe that the same invalid
direct upstream providers were involved in all these hijacks,
which already gives some indication of possible counter-
measures. Finally, all URL’s advertised in spam emails are
sharing a common hosting infrastructure and were registered
in a similar way – suggesting that whois registration data can
also be leveraged in prevention systems. The key take-away of
this root cause analysis is that it enables us to link together
different hijacked preﬁxes showing they are used by the same
spamming actors for a long period of time in a very stealthy
way.

E. Summary

Finding 1: We uncovered two types of hijack phenomena:
long-lived and short-lived. Long-lived hijacks can last from a
week to several months, whereas short-lived hijacks last from
a few minutes to several days.

Finding 2: Attackers were found to stealthily hijack prop-
erly registered but unannounced IP address space by using two
different hijacking techniques (as deﬁned in Section IV-C on
page 6): preﬁx hijacking and AS hijacking. In preﬁx hijacking,
the attacker announced an IP address block using an invalid
BGP origin AS via a valid direct upstream provider (ﬁrst hop)
AS. In AS hijacking, the attacker announced an IP address
block using its valid BGP origin AS but via an invalid direct
upstream provider (ﬁrst hop) AS.

Finding 3: In the 2,454 preﬁx hijacks we found only six
different invalid BGP origin ASes. In the 201 AS hijacks we
found, for 195 different valid BGP origin ASes, only three
different invalid upstream provider ASes. One AS, involved
in the hijack of 793 IP address blocks over 16 months, was
observed ﬁrst as an invalid upstream provider AS, and then
as an invalid BGP origin AS. These 793 hijacks were later
conﬁrmed by the ISP providing transit to that AS, who con-
sequently terminated the contract with this customer abusing
the routing infrastructure.

Finding 4: Spamming using hijacked IP preﬁxes appears
to be an effective technique for defeating known protections,
such as spam IP blacklists. Moreover, almost none of the IP
address blocks were hijacked more than once meaning that in
this case blacklisting those blocks after the hijack ends is not
particularly useful. Finally, spammers also use the hijacked IP
address blocks as a hosting infrastructure for spam advertised
content.

Finding 5: Spammers mostly hijack IP preﬁxes that have
never been advertised or left unadvertised for a very long time,
typically more than one year.

Finding 6: Hijacking spammers seem to prefer IP address
blocks that were properly registered, in contrast to "bogon"
IP address blocks whose announcements are commonly au-
tomatically ﬁltered out using for instance the list from Team
Cymru [11].

7Disclaimer: IP addresses, domain names and email addresses were found
in campaigns launched from likely hijacked networks only between January
2013 and June 2014. These may have been abused and stolen from their
legitimate owners and, therefore, may now be legitimately used.

Finding 7: Many hijacked IP address blocks we identiﬁed
refer to organisations that ceased to exist. Orphan IP address
blocks that are left behind then become targets of choice

11

Fig. 9. An example of a large-scale spam campaign involving multiple hijacked IP preﬁxes. The nodes laid in clock-wise fashion reﬂect the timeline of the
campaign.

for spammers as they can likely hijack them without being
noticed. As of July 2014 as much as 20.26% of the whole
IPv4 address space8 is currently allocated or assigned but not
publicly announced.

Finding 8: Some short-lived hijacks were clearly associ-
ated with spam activities, conﬁrming the existence of the
BGP hijacking spammers phenomenon as introduced in [35].
However, a large portion of them exhibited no spam and
we conjecture that
they would ideally serve as a moving
infrastructure to host malicious servers.

V. EFFECTIVENESS OF CURRENT

COUNTER-MEASURES

Different technologies and systems have been designed to
detect and mitigate BGP hijacks. In this section we evaluate
the effectiveness of two BGP hijack counter-measures: a state-
of-the-art BGP hijack detection system called Argus [40] and
the BGP security framework RPKI [24], [30], [31].

A. BGP hijack detection

There have been numerous systems [1], [23], [29], [40]
developed to detect and mitigate BGP hijacks. One of them,
Argus [40], aims at detecting BGP hijacks in real-time by
using a combination of BGP data and ping measurements to
detect, upon a routing change related to a network, changes in

8Based on statistics published by RIRs and available at http://bgp.potaroo.

net/ipv4-stats/preﬁxes.txt

the network’s reachability indicating a possible hijack. In an
effort to assess the security impact of the hijack incidents we
uncovered, we decided to verify the effectiveness of the Argus
system against these cases. We chose Argus for two reasons:
(i) it is currently deployed and publicly available, and provides
an historical feed of alerts, and (ii) it is also able to detect all
types of hijacks, namely those where the attacker hijacks an
IP address block by using an invalid BGP origin AS or by
forging part of the BGP AS path.

It turns out that none of the 2,655 hijacks we identiﬁed
were reported by Argus. The reason is that most BGP hijack
detection systems [1], [23], [29], [40] work by building a
model of the Internet AS-level topology and then using it to
validate any routing change. However, because all hijackings
we identiﬁed involve IP space that was unannounced prior to
being hijacked, there is no state for the IP address blocks in the
model resulting in any new route announcement to be accepted
as legitimate. Although current BGP hijack detection tech-
niques are valuable for network operators to monitor their own
networks, their inability to currently detect hijacks like those
we observed suggest that those techniques should integrate in
the future in their detection scheme some characteristics of the
hijacks we have identiﬁed.

B. BGP hijack prevention

Besides BGP hijack detection techniques,

the network
operators have started to adopt and deploy a BGP hijack
prevention framework commonly referred to as the RPKI
system. Though many approaches have been proposed to

12

(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:77)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:59)(cid:39)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:58)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:52)(cid:58)(cid:52)(cid:60)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:60)(cid:47)(cid:46)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:55)(cid:57)(cid:43)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:17)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:77)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:39)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:59)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:41)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:82)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:60)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:45)(cid:46)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:59)(cid:51)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:60)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:58)(cid:55)(cid:43)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:59)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:57)(cid:38)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:59)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:46)(cid:55)(cid:41)(cid:59)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:39)(cid:52)(cid:43)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:59)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:39)(cid:60)(cid:38)(cid:48)(cid:42)(cid:58)(cid:41)(cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:17)(cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:39)(cid:43)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:51)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:60)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:58)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:53)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:92)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:49)(cid:41)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:43)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:39)(cid:38)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:37)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:52)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:39)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:37)(cid:53)(cid:39)(cid:45)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:41)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:46)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:39)(cid:46)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:38)(cid:59)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:38)(cid:58)(cid:39)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:39)(cid:41)(cid:54)(cid:60)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:41)(cid:52)(cid:59)(cid:48)(cid:59)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:77)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:43)(cid:54)(cid:41)(cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:53)(cid:57)(cid:38)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:52)(cid:59)(cid:58)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:39)(cid:59)(cid:52)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:59)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:52)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:51)(cid:60)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:59)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:55)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:59)(cid:38)(cid:48)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:58)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:37)(cid:55)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:39)(cid:39)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:59)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:60)(cid:45)(cid:58)(cid:52)(cid:45)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:51)(cid:58)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:43)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:49)(cid:40)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:50)(cid:53)(cid:46)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:50)(cid:47)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:58)(cid:37)(cid:54)(cid:46)(cid:52)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:58)(cid:37)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:58)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:42)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:60)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:51)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:52)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:59)(cid:58)(cid:42)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:43)(cid:38)(cid:41)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:37)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:59)(cid:45)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:53)(cid:45)(cid:51)(cid:39)(cid:51)(cid:41)(cid:37)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:77)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:39)(cid:59)(cid:53)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:43)(cid:54)(cid:42)(cid:46)(cid:41)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:45)(cid:43)(cid:57)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:59)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:60)(cid:54)(cid:37)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:41)(cid:51)(cid:60)(cid:42)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:39)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:41)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:59)(cid:59)(cid:39)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:43)(cid:60)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:45)(cid:46)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:52)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:55)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:43)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:43)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:39)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:59)(cid:52)(cid:60)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:43)(cid:59)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:58)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:47)(cid:39)(cid:55)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:60)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:60)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:46)(cid:57)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:60)(cid:53)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:59)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:37)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:39)(cid:57)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:42)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:58)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:46)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:41)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:35)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:58)(cid:37)(cid:45)(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:42)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:45)(cid:46)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:59)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:47)(cid:53)(cid:52)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:35)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:60)(cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:52)(cid:39)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:43)(cid:48)(cid:43)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:37)(cid:39)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:52)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:43)(cid:41)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:58)(cid:38)(cid:52)(cid:37)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:51)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:47)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:39)(cid:37)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:39)(cid:38)(cid:59)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:77)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:41)(cid:55)(cid:38)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:54)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:57)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:55)(cid:37)(cid:54)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:24)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:59)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:35)(cid:70)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:55)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:59)(cid:43)(cid:38)(cid:47)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:58)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:57)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:39)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:46)(cid:60)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:57)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:42)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:58)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:35)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:54)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:51)(cid:37)(cid:59)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:59)(cid:45)(cid:47)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:37)(cid:51)(cid:59)(cid:59)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:43)(cid:57)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:47)(cid:43)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:46)(cid:42)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:41)(cid:49)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:45)(cid:60)(cid:47)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:59)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:48)(cid:36)(cid:53)(cid:46)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:44)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:53)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:42)(cid:57)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:41)(cid:51)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:46)(cid:41)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:35)(cid:70)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:77)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:37)(cid:46)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:51)(cid:41)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:43)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:77)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:60)(cid:46)(cid:58)(cid:42)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:57)(cid:52)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:53)(cid:59)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:59)(cid:46)(cid:60)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:52)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:42)(cid:58)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:49)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:59)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:59)(cid:55)(cid:53)(cid:57)(cid:46)(cid:52)(cid:55)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:52)(cid:59)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:38)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:43)(cid:41)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:58)(cid:55)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:37)(cid:58)(cid:51)(cid:45)(cid:43)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:16)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:39)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:42)(cid:35)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:39)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:57)(cid:41)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:91)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:45)(cid:60)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:42)(cid:39)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:16)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:93)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:55)(cid:41)(cid:58)(cid:53)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:88)(cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:46)(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:45)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:37)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:45)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:37)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:37)(cid:39)(cid:55)(cid:49)(cid:45)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:47)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:35)(cid:37)(cid:50)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:42)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:43)(cid:37)(cid:57)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:47)(cid:46)(cid:45)(cid:49)(cid:48)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:59)(cid:45)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:77)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:47)(cid:59)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:42)(cid:48)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:38)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:59)(cid:46)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:42)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:53)(cid:46)(cid:59)(cid:47)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:55)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:59)(cid:38)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:43)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:39)(cid:46)(cid:45)(cid:41)(cid:52)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:52)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:39)(cid:38)(cid:39)(cid:52)(cid:48)(cid:55)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:52)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:38)(cid:37)(cid:39)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:58)(cid:42)(cid:39)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:59)(cid:52)(cid:42)(cid:59)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:60)(cid:53)(cid:47)(cid:60)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:49)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:60)(cid:43)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:53)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:58)(cid:45)(cid:53)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:42)(cid:46)(cid:39)(cid:43)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:17)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:47)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:57)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:58)(cid:37)(cid:54)(cid:37)(cid:43)(cid:49)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:55)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:41)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:37)(cid:47)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:47)(cid:39)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:52)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:52)(cid:41)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:37)(cid:59)(cid:46)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:41)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:53)(cid:37)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:59)(cid:49)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:93)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:80)(cid:71)(cid:93)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:51)(cid:37)(cid:58)(cid:37)(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:42)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:46)(cid:57)(cid:41)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:39)(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:46)(cid:39)(cid:52)(cid:39)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:91)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:58)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:39)(cid:60)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:41)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:42)(cid:52)(cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:58)(cid:43)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:44)(cid:57)(cid:36)(cid:38)(cid:60)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:50)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:55)(cid:17)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:24)URL hosting server IP addressIP preﬁxURL domain namewhois registrant email addreswhois registrarKeysdatebring security to BGP [25], this framework has been gaining
more momentum than others in the last few years. This is
likely due to the fact that it is the only framework being
standardised by the IETF. We are not aware of any other
framework that is ready and mature enough to go through
that process. The framework relies on a Resource Public
Key Infrastructure (RPKI), standardised in RFC 6480 [31],
to prevent the injection of bogus routing announcements. The
RPKI used in this scheme consists of a database of certiﬁcates
of two types: (i) a type A called Route Origin Authorisation
(ROA) binds an IP address block to its authorised BGP origin
AS(es), and (ii) a type B that binds a router to the AS number
it belongs to. The certiﬁcation chain follows the AS number
and IP address delegation chain, with the IANA acting as the
root certiﬁcate authority for RIR’s certiﬁcates, a RIR is then
acting as the certiﬁcate authority for ISP’s certiﬁcates, etc.
Each certiﬁcate is signed with the private key of its holder
and also embeds its public key. The framework proposes
two separate techniques to secure BGP: (1) secured route
origination and (2) secured route propagation (or BGPsec).
Secured route origination, standardised in RFC 6483 [24], uses
ROAs (type A certiﬁcates) to verify that a given IP address
block is originated by the authorised AS(es). A router is then
able to verify the validity of a received BGP update for a given
IP address block and BGP origin AS by (1) querying the RPKI
for a ROA related to the IP address block and verifying its
cryptographic validity, and, (2) if the ROA is valid, verifying
that the origin AS and the length of IP preﬁx observed in
the BGP update match the authorised origin AS(es) and preﬁx
length in the ROA. This prevents an attacker from announcing
a block he does not own. Secured route propagation [30] aims
at preventing AS path forgery by ensuring that each AS in the
AS path was not impersonated. This is done by having each
router signing a BGP update it propagates so that subsequent
routers can verify, using type B certiﬁcates from the RPKI,
that all routers which have signed the update indeed belong to
the ASes found in the path.

Secure route origination is progressively being deployed.
According to the RIPE NCC [37] there is currently 4.1% of the
IPv4 address space covered by ROAs. Interestingly, none of the
IP address blocks that we identiﬁed as having been hijacked
were covered by a ROA at the time they were hijacked. In
92% of the hijacks we observed, the attacker announced the IP
address blocks using an invalid BGP origin AS (preﬁx hijacks
as deﬁned in Section IV-C on page 6). Providing a ROA had
been issued for these blocks and their valid BGP origin AS,
the RPKI would have invalidated the bogus announcements.
However, assuming ROAs would bind IP address blocks
with their legitimate BGP origin AS, hijacks can still be
successful if attackers forge the BGP AS path and prepend the
valid BGP origin AS to it, which is exactly what we observed
in 8% of the hijacks (AS hijacks as deﬁned in Section IV-C on
page 6). Secured route propagation is currently still at an early
stage and not yet being deployed. In the meanwhile, although
BGP origin validation via ROAs does not intend to prevent
BGP AS path forgery, as acknowledged in RFC 6483 [24],
the RPKI and ROAs could nevertheless be leveraged to prevent
unannounced IP address blocks from being hijacked by issuing
a ROA for AS0 and each unannounced IP address block
(such ROAs are already used to prevent the announcement of
reserved/unallocated IP space as dictated in RFC 6483 [24]).

Then, the RPKI will classify all routes for these IP address
blocks as invalid. This solution is not perfect though as it
requires a speciﬁc ROA to be issued when an IP address block
becomes unannounced which, in the case of orphan blocks, is
unlikely. Overall, the only proper solution to prevent BGP AS
path forgery and the AS hijacks we identiﬁed is to have secured
routed propagation, i.e., BGPsec, deployed. Unfortunately, this
solution is much more invasive and cannot be deployed without
substantial software and hardware updates on all routers.
Moreover, the standardisation process of BGPsec is not yet
completed and there is no router code available as of today.
Some vendors are working on it, or intending to work on it,
but some other vendors do not even list it on their roadmap.

VI. LESSONS LEARNED AND CONCLUSION

We conclude by providing concrete lessons that can be
leveraged to improve existing spam and BGP hijack mitigation
techniques and thwart these attacks.

Lesson 1: We have conﬁrmed the existence of BGP spec-
trum agility in the real-world in the form of stealthy and
persistent campaigns of malicious BGP hijacks.

Lesson 2: Today’s BGP hijack mitigation systems, such
as [1], [23], [24], [29], [40], are blind to hijacks of registered
though unannounced IP address space carried out by announc-
ing an IP address block using its valid BGP origin AS but via
an invalid upstream provider AS. The complete deployment
of BGPsec and ROA’s would prevent these attacks. In the
meantime, we would suggest BGP hijack detection systems to
include signatures for these hijacks based on the characteristics
we uncovered.

Lesson 3: Owners of unannounced IP address blocks leave
them vulnerable to hijacking. A best practice would be to
announce all blocks even if they are unused.

Lesson 4: A worldwide hunt for orphan IP address blocks
should be launched to prevent them from being hijacked and
further used for malicious purposes. Additionally, IP address
block owners that cease to exist or do not require the IP
resources anymore should (be forced to) return them. Keeping
IRR and RPKI data fresh is therefore key to prevent hijacks
of such IP address space.

Lesson 5: Uncovered hijacks involved many different IP
address blocks and origin ASes but very few invalid BGP
origin ASes and direct upstream provider ASes. This suggests
that ASes identiﬁed as invalid or malicious in previous hijacks
can be leveraged to identify subsequent hijacks or even block
trafﬁc from and to IP address blocks advertised via these ASes.

As future work we plan to expand the collaboration we
have recently initiated with CERTs, ISPs and the NANOG
and RIPE communities at large. A concrete outcome of these
ongoing discussions was the conﬁrmation that one of the ASes
found to be malicious by our system and responsible for
the hijack of 793 IP preﬁxes has seen his peering contract
terminated by its valid upstream ISP.

13

[31] M. Lepinski and S. Kent, “An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet

Routing,” February 2012, RFC 6480.

[32] Z. M. Mao, J. Rexford, J. Wang, and R. H. Katz, “Towards an accurate
AS-level traceroute tool,” in SIGCOMM. ACM, 2003, pp. 365–378.
[33] L. Nobile and L. Vegoda, “Address Space and AS Hijacking,” http:
//meetings.ripe.net/ripe-48/presentations/ripe48-eof-nobile-vegoda.pdf,
May 2004.
J. Qiu and L. Gao, “Detecting Bogus BGP Route Information: Going
Beyond Preﬁx Hijacking,” in SecureComm.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 381–390.
[35] A. Ramachandran and N. Feamster, “Understanding the Network-Level

[34]

Behavior of Spammers,” in SIGCOMM. ACM, 2006, pp. 291–302.

[36] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares, “A Border Gateway Protocol 4,” January

2006, RFC 4271.

[37] RIPE

NCC,

//certiﬁcation-stats.ripe.net/.

“RPKI

ROA

certiﬁcation

statistics,”

http:

[38] M. Roughan, W. Willinger, O. Maennel, D. Perouli, and R. Bush,
“10 Lessons from 10 Years of Measuring and Modeling the Internet’s
Autonomous Systems,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1810–1821, 2011.
J. Schlamp, G. Carle, and E. W. Biersack, “A forensic case study on
AS hijacking: the attacker’s perspective,” SIGCOMM CCR, pp. 5–12,
2013.

[39]

[40] X. Shi, Y. Xiang, Z. Wang, X. Yin, and J. Wu, “Detecting preﬁx
hijackings in the internet with argus,” in IMC. ACM, 2012, pp. 15–28.
[41] G. Siganos and M. Faloutsos, “Neighborhood Watch for Internet Rout-
ing: Can We Improve the Robustness of Internet Routing Today?” in
INFOCOM.

IEEE, 2007, pp. 1271–1279.

[42] O. Thonnard, “A multi-criteria clustering approach to support at-
tack attribution in cyberspace.” Ph.D. dissertation, École Doctorale
d’Informatique, Télécommunications et Électronique de Paris, March
2010.

[43] O. Thonnard, L. Bilge, G. O’Gorman, S. Kiernan, and M. Lee, “Indus-
trial espionage and targeted attacks: Understanding the characteristics
of an escalating threat,” in RAID. Springer, 2012, pp. 64–85.

[44] O. Thonnard and M. Dacier, “A strategic analysis of spam botnets

operations,” in CEAS. ACM, 2011, pp. 162–171.

[45] V. Torra, “The weighted OWA operator,” Int. Journal of Intelligent

Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 153–166, 1997.

[46] P.-A. Vervier, Q. Jacquemart, J. Schlamp, O. Thonnard, G. Carle,
G. Urvoy-Keller, E. W. Biersack, and M. Dacier, “Malicious BGP
Hijacks: Appearances Can Be Deceiving,” in International Conference
on Communications (ICC) Communications and Information Systems
Security (CISS) Symposium. Sydney: IEEE, June 2014, pp. 884–889.
[47] P.-A. Vervier and O. Thonnard, “SpamTracer: How Stealthy Are Spam-
mers?” in 5th International Trafﬁc Monitoring and Analysis (TMA)
Workshop (INFOCOM workshops). Turin: IEEE, April 2013, pp. 453–
458.

[48] R. Yager, “On ordered weighted averaging aggregation operators in
multicriteria decision-making,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 183–190, 1988.

[49] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. C. Hu, Z. M. Mao, and R. Bush, “iSPY:
Detecting Ip Preﬁx Hijacking on My Own,” in SIGCOMM. ACM,
2008, pp. 327–338.

[50] C. Zheng, L. Ji, D. Pei, J. Wang, and P. Francis, “A light-weight
distributed scheme for detecting IP preﬁx hijacks in real-time,” in
SIGCOMM. ACM, 2007, pp. 277–288.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We would like to thank Symantec.cloud, in particular Steve
White and Andrew Watson, for providing us with the spam
dataset.

REFERENCES

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]

“BGPmon Network Solutions Inc.” http://www.bgpmon.net/.
“Composite Blocking List,” http://cbl.abuseat.org/.
“GeoIP: MaxMind,” http://www.maxmind.com/.
“Illegal usage of AS51888 (and PI 91.220.85.0/24) from AS42989
and AS57954 (in ukraine),” http://mailman.nanog.org/pipermail/nanog/
2013-May/058230.html.
“IRR.net,” http://www.irr.net/.
“Manitu.net DNSBL,” http://www.dnsbl.manitu.net/.
“North American Network Operators’ Group (NANOG) mailing list,”
https://www.nanog.org/list/.
“RIPE Routing Information Service
data-tools/stats/ris/.
“RIPE Working Group Mailing Lists,” https://www.ripe.net/ripe/mail/
wg-lists/.
“Spamhaus,” http://www.spamhaus.org/.
“Team Cymru Community Services,” http://www.team-cymru.org/.
“The New Threat: Targeted Internet Trafﬁc Misdirection,” http://www.
renesys.com/2013/11/mitm-internet-hijacking/.
“Uceprotect,” http://www.uceprotect.net/.
“University of Oregon RouteViews Project,” http://www.routeviews.
org/.
“YouTube
mailarchives/old_archive/2008-02/msg00453.html.
“Preﬁx hijacking by Michael Lindsay via Internap,” http://mailman.
nanog.org/pipermail/nanog/2011-August/039381.html, August 2011.

http://www.nanog.org/mailinglist/

(RIS),” http://www.ripe.net/

Hijacking,”

IP

[17] G. Beliakov, A. Pradera, and T. Calvo, Aggregation Functions: A Guide

for Practitioners. New York: Springer, Berlin, 2007.

[18] M. Cova, C. Leita, O. Thonnard, A. D. Keromytis, and M. Dacier, “An
Springer-Verlag, 2010,

analysis of rogue AV campaigns,” in RAID.
pp. 442–463.

[19] A. de la Haye, “Chief Operations Ofﬁcer at RIPE NCC,” RIPE67,

October 2013.

[20] Z. Duan, K. Gopalan, and X. Yuan, “An Empirical Study of Behavioral
Characteristics of Spammers: Findings and Implications,” Computer
Communications, vol. 34, no. 14, pp. 1764–1776, Sep. 2011.

[21] R. Hiran, N. Carlsson, and P. Gill, “Characterizing large-scale routing
anomalies: a case study of the china telecom incident,” in PAM.
Springer-Verlag, 2013, pp. 229–238.

[22] M. Hogewoning, “IP Hijacking: Secure Internet Routing,” March 2012.
[23] X. Hu and Z. M. Mao, “Accurate Real-Time Identiﬁcation of IP Preﬁx

Hijacking,” in Security and Privacy.

IEEE, 2007, pp. 3–17.

[24] G. Huston and G. Michaelson, “Validation of Route Origination Using
the Resource Certiﬁcate Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and Route
Origin Authorizations (ROAs),” February 2012, RFC 6483.

[25] G. Huston, M. Rossi, and G. Armitage, “Securing BGP: A Literature
Survey,” Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 13, no. 2, pp.
199–222, 2011.

[26] V. Khare, Q. Ju, and B. Zhang, “Concurrent preﬁx hijacks: occurrence

and impacts,” in IMC. ACM, 2012, pp. 29–36.

[27] G. Kondrak, “N-gram similarity and distance,” in Conf. on String

Processing and Information Retrieval, 2005, pp. 115–126.

[28] C. Kruegel, D. Mutz, W. Robertson, and F. Valeur, “Topology-Based
Detection of Anomalous BGP Messages,” in RAID, 2003, pp. 17–35.
[29] M. Lad, D. Massey, D. Pei, Y. Wu, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “PHAS:
A preﬁx hijack alert system,” in USENIX Security Symposium, 2006.
[30] M. Lepinski, “BGPSEC Protocol Speciﬁcation,” February 2013,

internet-Draft.

14

APPENDIX

MULTI-STAGE ANOMALY SCORING AND AGGREGATION
We use Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) to de-
sign a multi-stage decision-making process and identify the
most
interesting cases by ranking IP blocks according to
their (anomalous) routing behavior. A typical MCDA problem
consists to evaluate a set of alternatives w.r.t. different criteria
using an aggregation function [17]. The outcome of this
evaluation is a global score obtained with a well-deﬁned aggre-
gation model that incorporates a set of constraints reﬂecting
the preferences and expectations of the decision-maker. An
aggregation function is deﬁned as a monotonically increasing
function of n arguments (n > 1): faggr : [0, 1]n −→ [0, 1].

OWA extends averaging functions by combining two char-
acteristics: (i) a weighting vector (like in a classical weighted
mean), and (ii) sorting the inputs (usually in descending order),
hence the name of Ordered Weighted Averaging [48]. OWA is
deﬁned as:

OW Aw(x) =

wix(i) =< w, x(cid:38) >

n(cid:88)

i=1

where x(cid:38) is used to represent
the vector x arranged in
decreasing order: x(1) ≥ x(2) ≥ . . . ≥ x(n). This allows
a decision-maker to design more complex decision modeling
schemes, in which we can ensure that only a portion of criteria
is satisﬁed without any preference on which exactly (e.g.
“at least” k criteria satisﬁed out of n). OWA differs from a
classical weighted means in that the weights are not associated
with particular inputs, but rather with their magnitude, and it
can thus emphasize the largest, smallest or mid-range values.
It might be useful also to take into account the reliability
of each information source in the aggregation model, like in
Weighted Mean (WM). Torra proposed thus a generalization of
OWA, called Weighted OWA (WOWA) [45]. This aggregation
function quantiﬁes the reliability of the information sources
with a vector p (as the weighted mean does), and at the
same time, by weighting the values in relation to their relative
ordering with a second vector w (as the OWA operator).
Weighted OWA is deﬁned by:

where x(i) is the ith largest component of x and the weights
ui are deﬁned as

n(cid:88)
 (cid:88)
 − G
function that interpolates the points (i/n,(cid:80)
G(i/n) =(cid:80)
G is linear if the points (i/n,(cid:80)

where the set Hi = {j|xj ≥ xi} is the set of indices of the
i largest elements of x, and G is a monotone non-decreasing
j≤i wj) together
with the point (0, 0). Moreover, G is required to have the two
following properties:

(cid:88)

j∈Hi

j≤i wj, i = 0, . . . , n;

W OW Aw,p(x) =

uix(i),



ui = G

pj

pj

j∈Hi−1

j≤i wj) lie on a

1.
2.

straight line.

i=1

When the number of criteria to be evaluated is large, it
is generally considered a best practise to organise them in

15

Fig. 10.
aggregation model M for anomaly scores.

Evaluation and ranking of candidate BGP hijacks: a multi-level

subgroups, which are then evaluated hierarchically. Figure 10
illustrates the design of our multi-stage anomaly scoring and
aggregation system, in which we organise the aggregation of
anomalies in different subgroups based on their semantics.
The advantage of a multi-stage aggregation model
is that
intermediate decision thresholds are not needed. Intermediate
aggregate scores are propagated up to the highest level where
they can contribute to the overall score.

Given the deﬁnitions here above, we deﬁne an aggregation
function Fa, with as output the aggregated score Sa given by
WOWA calculated for the anomaly a as:

Fa : Sa = W OW A(xa, wa, pa)

where xa is the vector of scores to aggregate and wa and pa
the WOWA weighting vectors. As shown in Figure 10, we can
then deﬁne our multi-stage anomaly scoring and aggregation
model M, with as output the ﬁnal score S1, for a given spam
network, as the recursive function Fa where:

F1 : S1 = W OW A(x1 = (S2, S3, S4, S5, S6), w1, p1)
F2 : S2 = W OW A(x2 = (S7, S8, S9), w2, p2)
F9 : S2 = W OW A(x9 = (ageo1, . . . , ageon−1), w9, p9)

. . .

As an example, we deﬁne w1 = (0.5, 0.3, 0.2, 0.0, 0.0) and
p1 = (0.2, 0.25, 0.15, 0.25, 0.15) to obtain the ﬁnal score S1 as
outcome of the top-tier aggregation stage. Vector w1 translates
here the intuition that a hijacked spam network does not always
exhibit all anomalies (e.g., a hijack does not necessarily involve
a BGP origin anomaly) hence we require that “at least some”
of the anomaly scores have a high score to contribute to a
ﬁnal aggregate score above a predeﬁned decision threshold.
The components of p1 translate the conﬁdence we have in the
different anomaly types to identify a suspicious routing change.
The highest conﬁdence score (0.25) is assigned to the tracer-
oute reachability anomaly S3 and BGP AS path deviation S5,
which by experience have proved being particularly reliable.
On the other hand the traceroute hop count anomaly S4 and
BGP origin anomaly S6 are assigned a lower conﬁdence score
(0.15) because we observed them only in a few rare hijack
scenarios. Finally, the traceroute path deviation S2 is given a
medium conﬁdence (0.2) as it can be affected by inaccuracies
in traceroute measurements. The model parameter deﬁnition
is done similarly at the other intermediary stages (for wi, pi
where i = 2, . . . , 9) so as to include expert knowledge and
model the preferences of a network analyst.

Traceroute IP reachability anomaly(n-1)(n-1)Traceroute IP-level deviation......Traceroute hop count anomalyTraceroute AS reachability anomaly6 x (n-1)...BGP AS path deviation...BGP origin anomaly(n-1)Geographical deviation...Traceroute AS-level deviationF1 : S1=WOWA(X1=(S2,S3,S4,S5,S6),W1,P1)F3 : S3F5 : S5F4 : S4F6 : S6F2 : S2=WOWA(X2=(S7,S8,S9),W2,P2)F7 : S7F8 : S8F9 : S9