Over-The-Top Bypass: Study of a Recent Telephony Fraud

Merve Sahin

Eurecom & Monaco Digital Security Agency

merve.sahin@eurecom.fr

Aurélien Francillon

Eurecom

aurelien.francillon@eurecom.fr

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we study the Over-The-Top (OTT) bypass
fraud, a recent form of interconnect telecom fraud. In OTT
bypass, a normal phone call is diverted over IP to a voice
chat application on a smartphone, instead of being termi-
nated over the normal telecom infrastructure. This rerout-
ing (or hijack) is performed by an international transit op-
erator in coordination with the OTT service provider, but
without explicit authorization from the caller, callee and
their operators. By doing so, they collect a large share of
the call charge and induce a signiﬁcant loss of revenue to
the bypassed operators. Moreover, this practice degrades
the quality of service without providing any beneﬁts for the
users.

In this paper, we study the possible techniques to detect
and measure this fraud and evaluate the real impact of OTT
bypass on a small European country. For this, we performed
more than 15,000 test calls during 8 months and conducted
a user study with more than 8,000 users.

In our measurements, we observed up to 83% of calls being
subject to OTT bypass. Additionally, we show that OTT
bypass degrades the quality of service, and sometimes collide
with other fraud schemes, exacerbating the quality issues.
Our user study shows that OTT bypass and its eﬀects are
poorly understood by users.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Telephony networks carry a huge volume of call, messag-
ing and data traﬃc every day. This is a complex and opaque
ecosystem, which combines multiple technologies and in-
volves various types of service providers and customers. The
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) has been the
primary medium enabling telephony since the last century.
Today, the global telephony network encompasses many dif-
ferent technologies such as Voice over IP (VoIP) and cellular
networks. VoIP technology has become a major part of the
global telephony network, e.g., it is used for dedicated peer-
ing links between operators or to reach VOIP phones with

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS’16, October 24 - 28, 2016, Vienna, Austria
c(cid:13) 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4139-4/16/10. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978334

regular, internationally routable, phone numbers1. Because
calls can be expensive, and are billed individually, telephony
is a very proﬁtable environment for many fraud schemes.
The CFCA estimates the global fraud aﬀecting telecom op-
erators to be worth $38.1 Billion in 2015 [6].

So-called Over-The-Top (OTT) services (e.g., WhatsApp,
Skype) use IP networks to implement a service without in-
volving telecom operators (i.e., passing “over the top” of
them). Because of their global presence, through smart-
phone application markets, OTT providers attract more cus-
tomers than most telecom operators. Indeed, studies fore-
cast 2 billion users of OTT messaging by 2018 [21]. OTT ap-
plications often provide voice communication services, but
they are normally not a part of the global telephony net-
work. However, interconnection between OTT and global
telephony network is possible through some gateways, which
we will explain in Section 2.1.1.

In this work, we present and analyze a recent type of tele-
phony fraud, called OTT bypass or OTT hijack, which arises
from a new kind of interconnection between telephony net-
works and OTT applications.
Indeed, in an OTT bypass
the OTT provider partners with a transit operator to hijack
regular calls (i.e., calls originated from a mobile or land-
line phone to a mobile number) to terminate them over
the OTT application. The large user base of OTT appli-
cations, and the high termination fee of some international
destinations, make this practice very proﬁtable for the OTT
provider and partnering operators. Indeed, OTT bypass has
been reported to cause losses to telecom operators in the or-
der of tens of millions of Dollars [8]. Moreover, users and
other operators are aﬀected in many ways, as we will study
throughout this paper.

Telephony and OTT regulation.

In order to protect customers, promote competition, and
prevent market abuses, telecommunications industries are
often subject to strict government regulation [24]. OTT
providers are not subject to these regulations, even though
they provide similar services. There are eﬀorts to regulate
OTTs and VoIP services in some countries [11, 44], but this
remain a challenge. A common argument is that OTTs are
fundamentally diﬀerent from operators and any regulation
on OTT will be against the nature of the Internet. The op-
posing view argues that OTTs should have the same regula-
tory obligations as operators (such as taxes, licensing, emer-
gency services and lawful interception) or that they should
be paying operators to use their networks [7].

1Standardized by the ITU as E.164 phone numbers [4].

1106OTT from users’ perspective.

While users enjoy the free communication services pro-
vided by OTT applications, they may also suﬀer from several
security and privacy threats, as their personal data (such as
contact lists, photos) is easily shared with these applica-
tions [29].

One issue that should concern all OTT users is the terms
of service and end user agreements imposed by OTTs. A
study shows that almost 70% of participants never pay at-
tention to the terms of agreements and privacy policies while
installing applications on their phones [15]. Moreover, it is
impractical for users to read and understand the terms of
service agreements of all the applications they are using [23].
As a result, OTT users may unknowingly accept terms of use
that come with the end user agreements or default applica-
tion settings.

Fraud detection in telephony networks.

Detecting the fraudsters in telephony networks is a chal-
lenging problem. Individual operators can deploy monitor-
ing systems to trace calls within their network, but can not
monitor calls once they are routed through another net-
work, which is typical for international calls. The SS7 pro-
tocol [18], the core signaling protocol of the PSTN, does not
provide a mechanism for tracing complete call route. This
information can only be recovered when diﬀerent operators
collaborate. This is often diﬃcult because of the variety and
number of operators, ﬁerce market competition and non dis-
closure agreements. Inevitably, operators lack the complete
view of the network and fraudsters are diﬃcult to identify.
1.1 Contributions

pass and position it in the current fraud ecosystem.

In this paper, we make the following contributions:
• We present the ﬁrst comprehensive study of OTT by-
• We measure the importance and eﬀects of OTT bypass
fraud on a case study of a small European country2:
technically, with experiments with more than 15,000
test calls over 8 months, and from the user perspective,
with a large-scale user survey.
• We show various implementation ﬂaws, as well as more
fundamental problems that OTT bypass can cause in
a network. We show that sometimes multiple fraud
schemes collide, intensifying the degradation in service
quality.
• Finally, we present evaluation criteria for multiple de-
tection and measurement techniques and compare them.

1.2 Paper organization

This paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
describe OTT in general and OTT bypass fraud.
In Sec-
tion 3, we present and discuss possible measurement tech-
niques to evaluate the impact of the fraud. Then we present
a case study of OTT bypass where we measure the impact of
OTT bypass on a small European country (Section 4) and
evaluate users’ perception about it (Section 5). Section 6
presents the related work and we conclude in Section 7.

2Because of legal concerns, we do not mention any operator
names, the name of the bypassed country/operator or of the
OTT application.

Figure 1: Types of OTT involved calls. a) Normal
OTT usage, b) OTT-out, c) regular OTT-in.

2. OTT AND OTT BYPASS
2.1 OTT communication services

Compared to the traditional messaging (SMS/MMS) ser-
vices and phone calls, OTT applications oﬀer many addi-
tional features (e.g., group chat, video calling, photo, ﬁle or
location sharing). Moreover, OTT services are usually free,
whereas the traditional telephony services can be expensive.
On the other hand, due to the high competition in OTT
market, it is challenging for OTT service providers to mon-
etize their products: Users are usually not willing to pay
for applications and they do not like advertisements. As a
result, OTTs need to ﬁnd other ways to make proﬁt, such as
the in-app purchases (e.g., for stickers and games [21]), and
paid services that allow interconnection with the telephony
network [17].
2.1.1 Telephony and OTT interconnections
To enable connectivity from the OTT service to the global
telephony network, OTT providers partner with telecom op-
erators3 and use gateways between the OTT network and
the PSTN. In this way, a call initiated from the OTT net-
work can be terminated on the telephony network and vice
versa. We will name these services as regular OTT -in and
-out services.

The -out service allows to reach the telephony network
from the OTT application, by terminating calls locally on
callee’s operator (Figure 1-(b)). This service is generally
paid by the OTT user to cover the cost of the local call
termination on the PSTN or mobile network.

The -in service (depicted in Figure 1-(c)) allows the OTT
application to be reachable from any phone on the telephony
network, by attributing a phone number to the OTT user.
This phone number is often allocated for this kind of ser-
vice, either by the telecom regulator, or indirectly through
another service provider. All calls to this phone number are
legitimately terminated over the application, by the OTT
network. In this way, the caller can make a cheap local call
and the OTT user can receive the call from anywhere in
the world through the application. A common example of
regular OTT-in service is provided by Skype. A user can
purchase a Skype number, so that he can answer with Skype
the calls initiated to this phone number.

3They may also oﬃcially become operators themselves.

1107this traﬃc over such gray routes. Despite constant ﬁght
against interconnect bypass, it is still an unsolved problem
in telephony networks, with an estimated annual revenue
loss of $5.97 Billion [6]. As we will show next, OTT bypass
makes this problem even more challenging.
2.4 OTT bypass

OTT bypass requires agreements between telecom opera-
tors and OTT service providers to “bypass” calls. Such calls
may originate from a landline or from a mobile number and
are supposed to terminate on a mobile number. When a
transit operator sees a call for a destination for which a by-
pass agreement exists, he will check with the OTT provider
if the mobile number is registered and online on the OTT
network. Many OTT smartphone applications use the mo-
bile phone number as user ID, this greatly simpliﬁes detec-
tion of phone calls which can be bypassed. The call will be
redirected over the OTT service without the knowledge of
the caller or acknowledgment of the callee4 (or of their oper-
ators). OTT bypass is very proﬁtable when the destination
of the call has a high termination fee (often in developing
countries). The price diﬀerence between the normal termi-
nation fee, and the negligible cost of OTT call received on a
smartphone application becomes a source of revenue for the
bypassing operator and the OTT service provider [16].

Unlike with other types of OTT-telephony interconnec-
tions, this does not beneﬁt the end users, as the caller re-
ceives no cost reduction, the callee may pay to receive the
call and, as we will show in this paper, the service quality is
often seriously impaired.

Figure 2 shows a ﬁctional example of a regular call from
Country A to Country B, where the customer pays 35 cents
per minute, operators carrying the call keep 5 cents each
and the terminating operator collects 25 cents to terminate
the call. In this way, the OTT provider proposes an agree-
ment to the transit operator to terminate its calls for 15
cents/min. The transit operator keeps 15 cents per minute
instead of 5 cents. Moreover, the OTT provider earns 15
cents per minute by taking over a call which is not intended
to be sent over IP. On the other hand, the operator in Coun-
try B sees a reduction of its incoming international call traf-
ﬁc, and incurs ﬁnancial losses due to the termination fees
that are not perceived.

Throughout the paper, we call the operator who performs
the bypass (the transit operator in Figure 2) the bypassing
operator.
In fact, the bypassing operator could be any of
the transit operators on the route, or even the originating
operator. All the subsequent operators are bypassed but
we will call the bypassed operator the operator who is the
main target of the bypass. In this paper we will further call
bypassed incoming calls incoming bypass, i.e., the bypass
from the view point of the terminating operator in Figure 2.
Conversely, we will call outgoing bypass the bypass of out-
going calls, i.e., from the view point of originating operator
in Figure 2.

To the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst trials to terminate
traditional calls on OTT networks started in 2013 [17] and
a patent was issued in 2014 describing this mechanism [10].
This patent also mentions that the OTT service provider
may reject some bypass attempts. In this case, the bypassing
operator can choose to route the call over another operator.

4As we will discuss later, the callee can opt-out from this
default option.

Figure 2: A normal call between 2 mobile phones
in black and OTT bypass in red.

These OTT services are challenging the traditional tele-
phony as they compete directly with telecom operator busi-
ness. However, they legitimately use the telecom infrastruc-
ture and the attributed number ranges. They are also seen
as a sign of healthy innovation and are generally accepted
by users, even if some countries try to block or regulate
them [28].

In this paper, we address a diﬀerent kind of service which
is called OTT bypass. We claim that OTT bypass is a fraud,
because the bypassing parties earn non-legitimate beneﬁts
from it, while bringing revenue losses on operators and de-
creasing the service quality and stability for users. We will
describe OTT bypass in detail in Section 2.4, but we ﬁrst de-
scribe the money ﬂow in international communications and
the more common forms of interconnect bypass fraud.
2.2 Money ﬂows in international calls

An international call originated from a mobile or ﬁxed
line, travels over multiple intermediate operators (transit
operators) before reaching its destination country and oper-
ator. Each of these transit operators get a share from the
call revenue for passing over the call, and the local operator
in the destination country receives a call termination fee for
terminating this international call on its network [12]. This
regular international money ﬂow is shown with black arrows
in Figure 2.

International call termination fees may be artiﬁcially high
in some countries due to monopolies, regulatory fees or taxes.
Such revenue is often used to cover other costs such as
network and infrastructure maintenance [1]. This is why
call termination fees change from country to country, with
small developing countries often having high termination
fees. This makes them an attractive target for a type of
fraud called interconnect bypass.
2.3 Interconnect bypass fraud

Interconnect bypass fraud aims to oﬀer cheaper prices for
international calls, by routing the calls fraudulently (gray
routes). Examples of interconnect bypass include simbox
fraud [41] and abuse of compromised Private Branch Ex-
changes (PBX) [27]. Simbox fraud often uses stolen SIM
cards (or abuses SIM cards with cheap voice plans) inside a
simbox (gateway between VoIP and GSM), which is used to
inject international calls into the local telephony network,
bypassing the international termination fee. PBX based by-
pass often abuses a compromised PBX for terminating in-
ternational calls as national calls.

A fraudulent operator can attract international call traﬃc
by advertising low call termination rates and then terminate

1108This mechanism is very similar to the crankback function-
ality that is employed in some call routing protocols [39].
Crankback returns a call to the previous switch, so that it
can choose another route (e.g., in case of congestion). The
patent mentions transmitting the call twice, via the OTT
provider and the traditional operator. The recipient’s phone
line and OTT application will ring simultaneously and the
one that is not answered will be canceled. We show in Sec-
tion 5 that this causes many problems for the users.
2.4.1 OTT bypass: A fraud or not?
It is often delicate to tell if some action is legal or not, es-
pecially when telecom operations are international with very
diverse laws. We do not claim that OTT bypass is illegal
(a lawsuit may be needed for this), but we claim that OTT
bypass is fraudulent for the following reasons. Firstly, a call
to a certain phone number has to be routed to the operator
to which the phone number was allocated by International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) or national regulators [4].
This is violated by OTT bypass, because the call is routed to
the OTT provider instead. Moreover, most countries impose
regulatory fees and taxes for incoming international calls.
These are paid by the caller, but hijacked by the bypassing
operator. Service level agreements between operators are
also violated when an operator pays for a premium quality
call route, but its calls are bypassed over the OTT network.
Unlike many OTT services, OTT bypass has almost no ben-
eﬁts for the users. In practice, OTT bypass is similar (in its
eﬀects) to other types of interconnect bypass fraud, such as
simbox bypass [41]. Finally, ITU recently created a working
group to study OTT Bypass, where OTT bypass is clearly
reported as a fraud [32].
2.5 Possible consequences of OTT bypass

Users may suﬀer from several problems when a call is by-
passed over OTT. First, the call is going over the public in-
ternet, without any guarantees of call quality and with poor
mobility management (moving away from a Wi-Fi area to
mobile data network leads to an interruption). The callee
will also be unable to use voicemail, call forwarding or call
blocking services provided by his operator. The caller will
pay the same fee for the bypassed call as he would pay for
a normal call. However, the callee may be charged for data
traﬃc while call reception is normally free, in most of the
world, and may sometimes miss calls.

Eﬀects of OTT bypass on bypassed operators can be more
severe. All bypassed operators will suﬀer from a decrease in
call volume. However, the terminating operator is likely to
incur the highest revenue loss.

In the short term, OTT bypass is proﬁtable to the by-
passing operator. However, as the OTT provider expands
its agreement coverage, it may be bypassed itself, as more
traﬃc is terminated on OTT networks. Thus, OTT bypass
and its eﬀects should be considered globally, rather than
individually by operators.

OTT bypass may also facilitate call hijacking: The reg-
istration veriﬁcation is performed with a code sent over a
regular text message. If an attacker is able to intercept such
a message5, he could register this account (phone number)
on another phone. Using this technique, we were able to
receive OTT bypassed calls on a phone that never had the

5E.g., through temporary access to the phone, a malicious
application, or account hijacking [43].

corresponding SIM card. Finally, OTT bypassed calls may
also evade lawful interception platforms.

3. DETECTION AND MEASUREMENT OF

OTT BYPASS

Detecting the existence of OTT bypass and measuring its
scale is important for bypassed operators to estimate losses,
inform their customers and collect evidence for legal cases or
in communication with regulators and bypassing operators.
The main diﬃculty for a bypassed operator is to measure the
traﬃc that is not ﬂowing through his network anymore. We
present possible techniques for detection and measurement
of OTT bypass and we use the criteria presented in Table 1
to evaluate them (Table 2). While we focused on detection,
most prevention techniques have to rely on detection ﬁrst.
In practice, multiple techniques can be combined to ﬁght
OTT bypass.
3.1 CDR volume analysis

Operators can observe the decrease in their incoming call
traﬃc and generated revenue from the Call Detail Records
(CDR). While this is an indicator, it does not provide a
reliable measurement. Indeed, there may be other reasons
for this decrease, such as regular OTT calls (other than OTT
bypass) or changes of habits. Additionally, this technique
can only measure eﬀects of incoming bypass, but it is easy
to implement and it does not interfere with the network and
users’ privacy (as long as CDRs are handled with care).
3.2 Tracking the OTT users’ online status

OTT applications often automatically discover preexisting
contacts on the network by using the address book (the so-
called address book matching technique). This can be used to
crawl registered phone numbers on an OTT network [14] and
was also used for targetted attacks [29]. Similarly, contacts’
online status displayed on the application can be monitored
as well. Correlating this with the decrease of international
calls for a large set of phone numbers could allow to estimate
the amount of bypassed calls on the network.

We partially validated this approach by collecting online
status of a test phone from the instrumented desktop ap-
plication of the bypassing OTT provider. This allowed us
to keep track of the online/oﬄine status of the phone with
90% accuracy when compared to the actual online/oﬄine
status of the phone6. However, we did not perform such a
large scale tracking of real users, due to the legal and privacy
issues with this approach.
3.3 Test Calls

A more precise measurement is possible using test calls.
There are many commercial Test Call Generation (TCG)
platforms used for QoS testing and fraud detection7. TCG
platforms provide call origination points worldwide, from
various networks in various countries. Using a TCG plat-
form, a bypassed operator can generate calls to its own net-
work from various operators in the world. The bypassed
operator needs to register some phone numbers to the OTT
application and observe if the calls generated by the TCG

6This experiment was conducted in a lab environment, with
a rooted Android phone and a steady Wi-Fi network.
7e.g., Sigos, Revector, Roscom

1109Table 1: OTT bypass measurement techniques evaluation criteria.

Detects either incoming or outgoing bypass

Bypass direction
No collaboration requirements Does not require collaboration of users, other operators or regulators
Easy deployment
Scalable
Accurate
Passive measurement
Ethical and privacy preserving
Complete
Deﬁnitive
No privileged access required
Representative measurement
Technically easy
Likely to succeed

Cheap and easy deployment, maintenance, no big changes to infrastructure
Scalable to millions of users, applicable to diﬀerent OTT vendors
Does not detect legitimate traﬃc as bypassed traﬃc (no false positives)
Measurements do not need intrusive setup, can be performed on past, logged data
Ethically feasible, respects users privacy
Detects all OTT bypass traﬃc (no false negatives or traﬃc which cannot be monitored)
Not a cat-and-mouse game between operators and OTT providers
Does not require access to some sensitive data or systems (e.g., CDR, network access)
Gives a representative view of the bypass aﬀecting the real call traﬃc
No potential obstacles foreseen in the deployment or implementation of the technique
Technique has been demonstrated work, or is very likely to work

Table 2: Measurement techniques with their advantages and drawbacks (yes, no, ∼partially, ?unclear).

I n
Indirect evaluation (CDR analysis) 
Test calls for incoming and outgoing routes 
Compare CDR with user status crawled on OTT network 
Pinpointing bypassing operators 
IP traﬃc analysis 

n/a      ?

Audio ﬁngerprinting (operator side)
Audio ﬁngerprinting (caller side)

 ∼ ∼ ∼ 
∼   

∼ ?

S

 ∼    ∼ 

∼ 




   ∼ 

 

 
 
 ∼  ∼  


 ∼ 



 

o m i n

c

y

b

u

g

c

t

g
O

  

 

  

q .
n

t

n

p

p

a

a

s s
r
o

s s
g

r e
t i o
y m e
a
p l o
b l e
o i n
a l a
c
o
c
A
N
   

y
b
o ll a
a
E

s

e

c

y

b

d

u

c

r e m e
a
s
r i v
a
o m p l e t e
a l /
C

D

e

p

m e
h i c

u

a

e

r

t e
s s i v
a

n i t i v
o
N
P
 ∼  ∼ 

E

t

ﬁ

t

n

y

 ∼    ∼  

r m t .
e
e

c

c

d

s
s

u

y

s

u

a

a
o

m e
e
t

e
a ll y
e l y

e

p

c

t
h

r e
n

e
g
r e s e
e
T

q .
t i v
a
r i v il e
n i c
p
L i k
e
R
∼ ∼ ∼
 
∼
∼
∼
∼
∼

platform terminate on the regular network or on the OTT
application.

Unfortunately, these platforms are expensive ($1 to $10/test

call), and often oﬀer inﬂexible packaged services. More-
over, TCG platforms can only show the bypass on incoming
routes. Checking for bypass on outgoing routes would re-
quire several phones deployed worldwide and with the OTT
service installed (or abusing registration mechanism as men-
tioned previously). As far as we know, there are no such
systems currently deployed.

Test calls shows bypass on tested routes but do not provide
the bypass rate on the real traﬃc. The knowledge of the
volume of calls on each particular route (before the bypass)
and the market share of the OTT application is needed to
estimate the actual bypass volume. However, routes can
change quickly and it might be diﬃcult to compute a good
estimation of the actual amount of calls on each route.

3.4 Pinpointing bypassing operators

A major problem with OTT bypass is the opacity of the
call routing. Because of this, discovering the bypassing oper-
ator is diﬃcult. Some test call generation platforms provide
information about the outbound route taken by a call. If a
test call can be performed from the next hop indicated by
the TCG platform, then this is one step closer to the bypass-
ing operator. Iterating the tests in this fashion may allow
to ﬁnd who is performing the OTT bypass. However, this
approach has multiple limitations, some of which we explain
on a case study in the next section.

3.5 Network trafﬁc analysis

As the OTT traﬃc is transmitted over the IP network,
the operator may attempt to detect it in the data traﬃc [13,
19, 25, 33]. The main issue with this approach is that it will
only allow to evaluate the OTT traﬃc from users who use

OTT over the mobile data network, but not over other data
networks from other operators (e.g., Wi-Fi/ADSL).
3.6 Audio ﬁngerprinting

Like for simbox fraud [41], the OTT bypass may incur
some distortion or particular ﬁngerprints on the audio chan-
nel which may be used for detection. The caller or his op-
erator could use audio ﬁngerprinting to detect OTT bypass
on outgoing calls. However, it seems diﬃcult (in terms of
resources) for an operator to ﬁngerprint all audio commu-
nications. We could imagine to perform this detection from
an application on caller’s smartphone, but the call audio in
smartphones is handled by the baseband processor and usu-
ally not available to the applications. Moreover, the incen-
tives for the caller and originating operator to detect OTT
bypass are not clear.
In addition to this, the callee does
not need detection, as he can see how he receives the call.
Finally, the callee’s operator can not ﬁngerprint the calls
because he can not access the audio stream of the bypassed
calls.

4. CASE STUDY: OTT BYPASS IN A
SMALL EUROPEAN COUNTRY

In this section, we present a case study of OTT bypass
performed on a mobile operator in a small European coun-
try. We mainly focus on test calls in our analysis, as the
other techniques either have drawbacks (e.g., ethically ques-
tionable, unpredictable results) or would require a complete
study on their own.

We next present results from two diﬀerent test call cam-
paigns in which 15,872 test calls were performed over a pe-
riod of 8 months (summarized in Table 3). The ﬁrst cam-
paign was performed with a generic commercial TCG plat-
form, with a very broad network coverage.
In the second
campaign, we performed more ﬁne grained analysis using a

1110Table 3: Test calls performed during 8 months of
experiments.
Origin
Worldwide
UK
Germany
Netherlands
Italy
Switzerland
Spain
Austria
Turkey
Total

Date
November ’15
March ’16
4; 68 days March; April-June ’16
May-June ’16
April-June ’16
April-June ’16
May-June ’16
April; May-June ’16
April ’16
8 months

Number of calls
1016
134
260; 2876
1220
3201
3635
1392
49; 2006
83
15,872

Duration
7 days
3 days

55 days
68 days
67 days
37 days
3; 37 days
3 days
352 test days

Figure 4: Partial map of operators involved in test
calls originating from UK.

ber type8 on the bypass rate. With 95% conﬁdence, landline
numbers were bypassed with a ratio of 17% ±4.57% and mo-
bile numbers were bypassed with a ratio of 25% ±4.12% 9.
The bypassing operator may be processing all the calls in
the same way, regardless of the originating number type.
We note that, the reception of calls from a landline on the
OTT application may be surprising for a callee who is not
aware of how OTT bypass works.

Identifying bypassing operators

4.1.2
For some of the calls (usually the calls that are originated
from landline numbers), the TCG platform also provides the
name of the outbound operator. For a non-bypassed call,
the mobile operator sees the call arriving from the inbound
operator, which we obtained from SS7 logs.

Figure 4 shows the result of combining those logs to build
a partial map of routes for the calls originating from 7 dif-
ferent operators in UK. We see that all calls initiated from
operators A2, A3 and A4 are bypassed. Those operators
may be using a fraudulent route, or they may be the by-
passing operators themselves. For operator A1, we are able
to see the ﬁrst level of transit operators (B1, B2, B3, B4).
A1 suﬀers from bypass, every time it selects the operators
B2 or B4 for routing the calls. Moreover, operator B1 should
have at least one bypassing operator among its immediate
or subsequent partners. This is also valid for operators A5,
A6 and A7. With this information, we could already start
to identify problematic routes and potential bypassing op-
erators.

Pinpointing the exact bypassing operator on a route would
be possible by iterating over the route (for example make
test calls from B1, on all its possible routes to artiﬁcially
“trace” a call) to identify the next hops and which of them
perform a bypass, until the home operator is reached. This
approach would require that (1) the calls will follow the
same route when bypassed or not (until the bypass), (2)
that a call will be routed similarly when traversing and when
originated by a network (3) routes are stable over time and
(4) we obtain the next hop for each operator on the route.
However, assumptions (1) and (3) do not always hold be-
cause route selection can be very dynamic, depending on
the contractual agreements and routing algorithms. We also
found cases where operators show diﬀerent bypass behavior
when they are in transit or originating positions. For ex-

8Determined using a numbering plan database [2].
9Using the test calls for which we have the originating num-
ber (74% of the test calls).

Figure 3: Bypass rate depending on callee’s roaming
status and the type of originating call.

smaller and dedicated test call platform that we built for
this purpose.
4.1 Global test with TCG platform

The TCG platform handles the generation of calls from
various landline and mobile numbers that belong to diﬀerent
operators in diﬀerent countries. For each call, the platform
provides a call log including the originating country and net-
work, call start time and call end time. At the receiver end,
we use 4 diﬀerent SIM cards that belong to the bypassed
operator and that are registered to the OTT application.
We collect the type of call termination from the recipient
phones. We do not answer the calls, but only let them ring.

4.1.1 Measuring the prevalence of OTT bypass
1016 test calls were performed with the TCG platform,
originating from 148 diﬀerent networks (operators) in 50 dif-
ferent countries. OTT bypass occurred on calls originating
from 90% of these countries and from 62% of the networks.
In total, 40% of the test calls were bypassed. This shows
that OTT bypass towards this destination is very frequent.
During those tests, the SIM cards were ﬁrst in the home
network (3 days) and then roaming in another country (4
days). The OTT bypass rates seem to stay the same whether
the user is roaming or not, as shown in Figure 3-(a). With
95% conﬁdence [35], bypass rates for domestic and roaming
phones are 37% ±4.14% and 36% ±4.26% respectively. We
also make a chi-square test to our hypothesis that the OTT
bypass rate is independent of phone’s roaming status. For
the signiﬁcance level of 0.05, p-value of the test is 0.713,
which means that these variables are independent. This is
consistent with the fact that the OTT bypass generally oc-
curs before the call reaches the home operator and that a
call to a roaming phone generally goes through the home
operator ﬁrst.

In Figure 3-(b), we analyze the eﬀect of originating num-

1111ample, all calls originated from operators C1 and C2 were
bypassed even though they have transit agreements with the
home operator. Finally, assumption (4) may not hold as the
TCG platform may not always provide the next hop infor-
mation.

Due to these limitations and the high cost of the TCG
platform, we were not able to perform such iterative test
calls to reveal a larger map of operators.
4.2 Fine grained experiment with our custom

test platform

In order to run long-term, customized tests, we used a
small test call generation platform that we built from scratch.
Our platform is built on Android phones that we control re-
motely via SSH on a Wi-Fi connection. We generate calls
from one Android phone (caller) to another (callee). For
each test call, we collect information from both phones. For
normally terminated calls, we also obtain the Call Data
Records (CDR) from the home operator (Figure 5). All
events are timestamped and phones are synchronized with
NTP. With this setup, measurements have an accuracy of 20
milliseconds or better. Again, we do not answer any calls,
but let them ring for one minute.

To generate test calls, we placed one phone per country, in
8 European countries. Even though we could test only one
originating operator per country, all of them were major
operators, with a total of more than 100 million customers.
For each generated test call, we collect the network name,
call start time, ringing time and call end time from the caller.
Because the network conditions may change during the day,
we initiate the test calls at every hour of the day, from each
of the operators.

On the receiving side, we use 3 smartphones each with a
SIM card from the bypassed operator. Two of them are reg-
istered on the OTT network and one of them was never regis-
tered. One of the registered SIM cards is used with changing
conﬁgurations such as connectivity on/oﬀ and OTT bypass
option10 enabled/disabled. We collect the incoming call logs
from the relevant database ﬁles in Android and the OTT
application. Using these logs, we obtain the incoming call
time, call termination type and the received caller ID. More-
over, the recipient phones are roaming in another European
country (visited country), outside of their home country, as
depicted in Figure 5.

4.2.1 Bypass rates and colliding fraud schemes
During our experiments, we noticed that multiple fraud
schemes sometimes collide. In a few cases, we detected other
types of interconnect bypass (via simbox and PBX) in addi-
tion to OTT bypass (Figure 5) and a possible case of false
answer supervision fraud which we will explain later.

We detect the simbox and PBX bypass frauds by compar-
ing the real caller ID and the received caller ID. An incorrect
caller ID often means that the call went over an illegitimate
gateway, which modiﬁed the caller ID.

If the Caller ID corresponds to a mobile phone number
range, we assume the call was bypassed with a simbox. On
the other hand, if the number belongs to a ﬁxed range we
assume this is a PBX bypass (we also check how the num-
ber was allocated).
In fact, a PBX may allow to spoof a
caller ID, but this is not possible with simboxes, as they

10The application setting that allows OTT bypass

Table 4: Simbox and OTT bypass combined.

OTT

OTT Registered,

Not Registered

Online

Normal calls
Simbox bypass
OTT bypass
Simbox + OTT bypass

38%
62%

-
-

22%
17%
35%
26%

essentially use an IP-GSM gateway. Thus, caller ID incon-
sistencies remains a good indicator of interconnect bypass.
In particular, we expect false negatives (forged caller ID)
but no false positives.

We observed up to 83% OTT bypass rate from 6 out of
8 countries (Figure 6-(b)). We now describe interesting ob-
servations on those test calls.

Simbox and OTT bypass collision.

The test calls performed from UK in March had a ratio of
61% of OTT bypass. Some of the calls were also bypassed
over a simbox, that uses SIM cards from a mobile operator
from another country. Table 4 shows the bypass rates for two
diﬀerent recipient phone numbers, one is registered to the
OTT application and the other is not. The overall simbox
bypass rate is 43% if the number is registered on the OTT
network and 62% otherwise. We have collected 34 unique
simbox numbers, belonging to the same operator.

We observe that 26% of the calls to the OTT registered
phone number were bypassed ﬁrst over the simbox (y in
Fig. 5) and then over the OTT network (z in Fig. 5). In
other words, the operator on which the simbox bypass oc-
curred routed the call over a route which is subject to OTT
bypass. However, not all the OTT bypassed calls had simbox
caller IDs. Thus, there should be another operator perform-
ing OTT bypass on a diﬀerent route, or before the simbox
bypass (such as x in Fig. 5). We also conﬁrm this when we
make calls while the phone is oﬄine (has no internet connec-
tivity). For example, we make a call to an oﬄine phone but
the phone does not receive the call (does not ring). Then we
turn on the connectivity and get 2 diﬀerent missed call noti-
ﬁcations on the OTT application: one with a correct caller
ID, and one with a simbox caller ID. In other words, each
time there is an attempt to send the call over OTT network,
the OTT application receives a missed call notiﬁcation.

PBX bypass on roaming part of the call.

We observed another interconnect bypass fraud, through
possibly compromised cloud IP-PBXs11. In this case, a test
call arrives with a caller ID belonging to a ﬁxed phone num-
ber, with a geographic area code from the visited country.
However, we never observe an OTT bypassed call with a
PBX caller ID. Also, the call data records from the bypassed
operator show the correct caller ID. This PBX bypass there-
fore occurred between the bypassed operator and the visited
operator ({ in Fig. 5). As a result, a call bypassed over the
OTT network has a correct caller ID, but a call terminated
normally may have an incorrect caller ID. Figure 6 sum-
marizes the bypass rates for two diﬀerent recipient phone
numbers, one is not registered on the OTT application (only
experiences PBX bypass) and the other is registered and on-

11 The phone numbers were allocated by the regulator to
this cloud PBX service provider, this interpretation was also
conﬁrmed by an operator who was aware of this bypass case.

1112Figure 5: Experimental setup and summary of fraudulent routes.

Figure 7: Post Dial Delay (PDD) in a normal phone
call and in a OTT bypassed phone call.

a transit operator starts billing the call while the call is ring-
ing, but not yet answered. The fraudulent transit operator
may also divert the call to a fake ringing tone or network
message and bill the call as if it was answered, without rout-
ing it to the legitimate destination [3].

4.2.2 PDD analysis and ringing anomalies
The Post Dial Delay (PDD) is the interval of time between
the press of the call button (or the last digit of the phone
number) and the ringing tone, if the call establishment is
successful, or any other network message indicating the call
outcome [31, 38]. The PDD covers the connection estab-
lishment process in which multiple switches and gateways
are involved in setting up an international call.
It is one
of the main QoS metric in telecommunication networks [42]
because it aﬀects caller’s perception of the state of the call
setup and, e.g., her decision to abandon the call [37, 38].
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) speciﬁes
a recommended mean PDD value of 8 seconds for interna-
tional PSTN calls and 16.5 seconds for international mobile
calls [30, 31].

VoIP to PSTN gateways generally increase the complexity
of call setup process and they often introduce additional per-
formance problems [16,22]. Thus, we expected the bypassed
calls to have higher PDDs (i.e., PDD (bypass) in Figure 7)
would be larger than PDD (normal)).

Surprisingly, we found that values for OTT bypassed calls
are very similar to those for normal calls (Figure 8). More-
over, for 2 countries, Germany and Turkey, the mean PDD

Figure 6: OTT and PBX bypass rates depending on
the phone status.

line on the OTT network (experiences both PBX and OTT
bypass). We can see that, among the countries that experi-
ence OTT bypass, PBX bypass rates are relatively lower for
OTT registered phones because most of the call volume is
terminated over the OTT network.

False Answer Supervision (FAS) fraud.

Among the 8 countries we analyze, Spain has the highest
percentage of fraudulent calls: 88% of calls were subject to
either OTT or PBX bypass. From Spain, we detect many
other problems: 17% of normal call terminations have an
empty caller ID and 30% of the calls did not reach their des-
tination (counted as failed calls). Moreover, we were charged
for 23% of the calls in the ﬁrst 10 days of the experiment,
even though we do not answer any of the test calls. In addi-
tion, half of the calls that were illegitimately billed, were ac-
tually failed calls. These issues probably stem from a fraud-
ulent gateway on the call route, which employs False Answer
Supervision (FAS) fraud. FAS is a common fraud [5], where

1113Implementation related problems

4.2.3
OTT bypass requires a good synchronization between the
bypassing operator and the OTT provider. Implementation
or conﬁguration mistakes may lead to unexpected problems.
The OTT provider needs to check if the user is online and
has a proper Internet connection before bypassing a call.
This can be done in several ways such as using periodic data
probes or using historic data from past calls and locations.
Failing to do this accurately can lead to two problems. First,
when a user receives a call but recently went oﬄine on the
IP network, the OTT provider may still try to bypass the
call. Because the user is oﬄine, he will miss the call, even
if his phone was in fact able to receive it as a regular call.
When he is back online, he will receive a missed call noti-
ﬁcation from the OTT network. Secondly, when the phone
is currently oﬄine and unreachable from the cellular net-
work, e.g., in airplane mode, the calls may still be bypassed.
I.e., the caller may hear a ringing tone, instead of getting a
network message (or voicemail) indicating that the callee is
unreachable.

It is possible that the parallel calling feature (described
in Section 2.4) was introduced to hide such problems. With
this feature, the bypassing operator notiﬁes the OTT provider
and another transit operator at the same time. Thus, even
if the OTT provider is not able to terminate the call, the
transit operator will try another route to terminate it. As a
consequence of this, the user may get a missed call notiﬁca-
tion on the OTT application even when a call was received
normally.

We highlight these problems by conducting a dedicated
experiment where we turn oﬀ the Internet connectivity oﬀ
and on and then we switch the phone oﬀ and on, waiting
for 5 minutes between each step. During the 5 minutes pe-
riod, we initiated 5 calls to this phone, one call per minute.
We do this several times (60 calls in total). We found that
60% of the calls were terminated normally, but left a missed
call notiﬁcation on the OTT application while the Internet
connectivity was oﬀ. Moreover, the caller heard a ringing
tone in 20% of the calls even though the recipient phone
was turned oﬀ. These problems are also mentioned by the
users (Section 5.1).
4.2.4 Discussion
Our experiments show that telephony networks are sub-
ject to a high amount of fraud, which deteriorates call qual-
ity.
It seems that OTT bypass often collides with other
forms of bypass. This may be due to a “race to the bottom”
on the price of call minutes. For example, when an operator
receives an artiﬁcially low price for a destination due to the
presence of OTT bypass, then it might make good oﬀers to
its customers for that destination. These low oﬀers may in
turn be abused by simbox fraudsters.

Even though the OTT provider seems to conceal some of
the eﬀects of OTT bypass, those eﬀects further degrade the
quality of call establishment.

Note that, we did not measure audio quality in our test
calls, because OTT bypass does not necessarily deteriorate
it. Instead, we have focused on other aspects of QoS, which
are fundamentally harder to solve in an OTT bypass scheme.
Moreover, as we mentioned in Section 3.6, call audio is not
easily accessible on smartphones and it would be costly to
answer the test calls.

Figure 8: Mean PDD and standard deviation, for
each country in function of the bypass type (no OTT
bypass for 2 countries).

Figure 9: Mean ring time diﬀerence and standard
deviation, for each country in function of the bypass
type (no OTT bypass for 2 countries).

values for OTT bypassed calls are even smaller than for nor-
mal calls. We therefore also measured the time diﬀerence
between the recipient phone ringing and the caller hearing
the ringing tone. We call this the ring time diﬀerence. As we
demonstrate in Figure 7, if the callee’s phone starts ringing
ﬁrst, and the caller hears the ringing tone later, ring time
diﬀerence becomes a negative value. On the other hand,
if caller hears the ringing tone ﬁrst and the callee’s phone
starts ringing later, this value will be positive. Ideally, the
ring time diﬀerence should be close to 0, so that the caller
and callee are be notiﬁed simultaneously. While a small ring
time diﬀerence is normal, we found that it is much higher
for OTT bypassed calls than normal calls (Figure 9). This
seems to indicate that the OTT provider sends a false ring-
ing tone to the caller, before the recipient’s phone actually
starts ringing. In other words, during the 30-40 seconds of
ring time diﬀerence interval, the caller will think that the
recipient’s phone is ringing, but the recipient will not be no-
tiﬁed about this call. As a result, caller may drop the call
before the callee is aware of the call or has time to answer.
This practice should not be confused with false answer su-
pervision fraud, because here even if the caller hears an early
ringing tone, the calls do not start to be charged.

1114Figure 10: Age and gender distribution for partici-
pants.

5. CASE STUDY: USER STUDY

In this section we present a user survey conducted on 8,243
customers of the bypassed operator which we studied in the
previous section.

Understanding users’ perception and experience on OTT
applications can provide insights on how to address the is-
sues with OTT bypass. We therefore performed a large-scale
survey where we ﬁrst aim to measure the perceived QoS [26]
(customers’ experience of using the OTT services). Then
we measure the assessed QoS (i.e., customer’s decision on
whether to continue using the service). Thus, in this survey
we measure:

QoS),

• OTT usage frequency, experience and habits (perceived
• the awareness about OTT bypass option,
• the tendency to opt-out from OTT bypass option, after

informing users about its eﬀects (assessed QoS).

5.1 Organization of the survey

The survey consists of 12 questions. We prepared the sur-
vey to be short, easy to answer, and to be as neutral as
possible. It was mainly advertised for users of the bypass-
ing OTT provider, via the mobile operator’s social media
pages and call center. As an incentive, a bundle of 2 GB of
free mobile data for 3 months was oﬀered to 10 randomly
selected participants. This attracted many responses, but
also helped to ensure that only real customers answered the
survey as the phone number had to be provided to obtain
the prize. The survey received 8,739 answers, out of which
7,617 were left after removing the duplicates12 and answers
from people who claimed they do not use the bypassing OTT
application. The questions were written in English and then
translated to the local language. A 5-level Likert scale [36]
is used in most of the questions. The rest of the questions
are either yes/no or open ended questions.
5.2 Results on general OTT usage

The ﬁrst ﬁve questions of the survey address the general
OTT and smartphone usage. Figure 10 shows that the ma-
jority of the participants are young adults and 70% of par-
ticipants are male.

Figure 11-(a) and (b) show that OTT applications are
very popular for both calling and messaging. This can also
indicate that a signiﬁcant percentage of voice and messaging
traﬃc is carried by OTTs. Moreover, 72% of OTT users are

12Only the ﬁrst answer for each customer (phone number)
was kept.

Figure 11: Statistics on the usage of OTT applica-
tions.

using it for international or both international and domestic
calls.

Another point we analyze is the frequency of use of Wi-Fi
and mobile data networks. Figure 11-(d) shows that both
Wi-Fi and data use is very common, yet the Wi-Fi usage
is slightly more frequent. This is an important observation,
because when the Wi-Fi network is used, the operator will
not see the OTT bypass IP traﬃc at all. Moreover, the fact
that OTT users stay online most of the time increase their
chances to be a victim of OTT bypass.

In ﬁgure 11-(d), we can see that people frequently experi-
ence call quality problems (such as distorted audio, incorrect
caller ID and call failures) with OTT applications. 70% of
participants experience problems, ’Sometimes’ or more of-
ten.
5.3 Results on the usage of the OTT service

After analyzing overall OTT usage, we ask 5 questions

only related to the bypassing OTT provider.

We ﬁrst remark that this OTT provider has a OTT-out
service, which is a regular OTT service as we described
in Figure1-(b). The OTT-out feature is advertised a lot,
whereas the OTT bypass option is only shown in the ap-
plication’s settings and in the terms of service, e.g., even
the OTT provider’s web page does not mention it. More-
over, OTT bypass option is enabled by default and users can
opt-out from it inside the application settings.

5.3.1 Awareness about OTT bypass option
We compare the user awareness about the prominent OTT-
out feature and the buried but active by default OTT bypass
option. Figure 12-(a) shows that awareness of the OTT by-
pass option (50%) is lower than the awareness of the OTT-
out feature (62%). However, number of people who have
deactivated OTT bypass is higher than the number of peo-
ple who are using OTT-out: Among the people who are
aware of OTT-out, 5% are actually using it, but among the
people who are aware of OTT bypass, 12% have deactivated
it. Apparently, OTT-out feature is not very popular among
the participants.

We consider OTT-out users as more advanced users, who
may check the settings and who can better understand the

1115increasing customers’ awareness about the eﬀects of the by-
pass.
5.4 Discussion

This survey demonstrates the dependence of users on OTT
applications, despite the quality problems they experience.
Most people are likely to use OTT applications as a cheaper
alternative to traditional communications. However, users
rarely pay attention to the details of the terms of use. The
fact that OTT bypass option was known by 50% of people,
but it was disabled by only 12% leads to think that this
option was not carefully reviewed by most of the people or
is not well understood. Therefore, operators can work on
increasing customers’ awareness on OTT bypass fraud and
informing application users about the deactivation option.

6. RELATED WORK

Various solutions are proposed to detect and prevent in-

terconnect bypass fraud in the literature.

In [20], a supervised learning algorithm is used to detect
simbox fraud. The dataset is gathered from a mobile oper-
ator and it includes CDRs from both legitimate subscribers
and a fraudulent simbox. The proposed classiﬁer has 98.7%
accuracy in identifying the SIM cards that are used in the
simbox device. A similar study is conducted in [40], with
a much larger dataset and diﬀerent set of features used for
classiﬁcation. This analysis shows that simboxes are usu-
ally static, they connect to a few base stations and they
initiate a signiﬁcant number of calls. These solutions are
not applicable to OTT bypass, because (i) there is no single
hardware that performs bypass, (ii) detection of OTT ap-
plication itself is useless, (iii) the bypassed calls may never
go over the terminating party’s operator and no CDRs will
be available for bypassed calls. Audio ﬁngerprinting can be
used to determine call provenance [9]. A more recent study
analyzes the degradation in call audio caused by the VoIP-
GSM gateways, to detect simboxes [41]. This technique may
be applied to detect outgoing OTT bypass calls on caller’s
operator or phone, as discussed in Section 3.

Identifying OTT traﬃc in the network is challenging, as
the applications are usually obfuscated, communicating over
encrypted channels and use proprietary protocols. Various
studies try to detect and classify Skype traﬃc ﬂows using
pattern detection, machine learning and protocol identiﬁca-
tion techniques [13, 25, 33]. Similar approaches can identify
other OTT applications, but only provide a partial solution
to the OTT bypass problem.
6.1 Commercial solutions

While OTT bypass is a recent form of telecom fraud, there
are already commercial oﬀers for detection and blocking of
OTT bypass13. Public documents do not clearly distinguish
between detection and prevention, more information is only
available under NDA. Those oﬀers seem to focus on bypass
detection using test calls, and then, possibly, use DPI (Deep
Packet Inspection) probes to block OTT IP traﬃc. It is un-
clear if the DPI probes are able to block the OTT bypass IP
traﬃc only or if all OTT traﬃc is blocked (which could raise
serious network neutrality problems). OTT bypass traﬃc

13http://www.revector.com/, http://www.sigos.com/, http:
//purgefraud.com, http://www.araxxe.com

Figure 12: Awareness on diﬀerent application op-
tions and bypass detection rates.

meaning and consequences of the OTT bypass option. Among
them, 73% were aware of the OTT bypass option, and 20%
have deactivated it. Thus, it is likely that knowing and un-
derstanding more about the OTT bypass option increases
the deactivation rate.

5.3.2 Bypass detection
Another goal of this survey is to understand participants’
experience with OTT bypass. Figure 12-(b) shows that, 30%
of people think that they have received at least one bypassed
call. Among the people who frequently receive bypassed
calls (often or very often), 28% were previously not aware
of the disable option, 64% were aware and 8% have already
disabled. Quite a high proportion of users was aware of the
OTT bypass option, but did not opt out. There are two
possible reasons for not disabling the OTT bypass option.
First, it is possible that people do not actually understand
the eﬀects of this option. Second, people may not be ex-
periencing any problems with it, so they leave the option
as default [34]. Then, we ask, in an open ended question, if
participants detect any calling anomalies with the bypassing
OTT application. 53% of people answer No to this question
while 0.6% answer Yes and 1% enter a long answer with
additional comments. Some of these comments are not re-
lated to our discussion, such as problems with video calls
or registration issues. However, some of the answers high-
light important issues and conﬁrm the problems we found
in Section 4:

but shows notiﬁcation afterwards

online

do not have Internet connectivity

• The application does not ring during an incoming call,
• Users appear online on the application, even when they
• Caller hears ringing tone, even when recipient is not
• Multiple call notiﬁcations are received for a single call
• Poor quality or interrupted calls (delays, noise)
• Receiving an international call from a landline on the

OTT application

5.3.3 Opt-out analysis
Finally, after we inform the participants about the eﬀects
of OTT bypass option, 45% of participants stated that they
consider opting out on this option. Among the people who
frequently detect bypassed calls and who were previously
aware of the OTT bypass option, 39% consider opting out.
This shows that, incoming OTT bypass can be reduced by

1116could be impossible to distinguish from plain OTT traﬃc,
but in practice some diﬀerences may be exploited.

7. CONCLUSION

OTT bypass aims at terminating traditional calls on OTT
network, while being seamless to both the caller and the
callee. In this study, we show that OTT bypass is far from
being seamless: communication quality is aﬀected in var-
ious ways and users experience problems with it. While
we focused on detection and measurement, more research is
needed for the prevention of OTT bypass fraud, without dis-
rupting regular OTT communications and violating network
neutrality.

Fighting OTT bypass fraud requires a cooperative eﬀort
between the diﬀerent parties that are aﬀected. We have
shown that informing users about the consequences of OTT
bypass may be the ﬁrst step to reducing it. Thus, increasing
awareness and collaboration between operators, regulators,
and users can help to work towards a deﬁnitive solution.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research was partially funded by the Principality of
Monaco. We also thank anonymous reviewers, the people
who hosted test phones and operators we worked with, for
their invaluable comments and support in conducting the
experiments.

9. REFERENCES

[1] Alternative calling procedures: Background and trends. ITU,

World Radiocommunication Conference, 2012.

[2] BSMilano, Worldwide National Numbering Plans Collection.

http://bsmilano.it/.

[3] Details about fas (false answer supervision). Nexmo Knowledge

base, 2016.

[4] The international public telecommunications numbering plan.

ITU-T Recommendation E.164, 1997.

[5] Subex wholesale fraud management survey 2013. Subex

Limited, whitepaper, 2013.

[6] Communications Fraud Control Association (cfca), 2015 global

fraud loss surveys, 2015.

[7] Smart regulation for OTT growth. Asia Internet Coalition,

whitepaper, October 2015.

[8] New threat to mobile network operator revenues. Revector

Company Blog, February 2016.
http://www.revector.com/index.php/new-threat-ott/.

[9] V. A. Balasubramaniyan, A. Poonawalla, M. Ahamad, M. T.

Hunter, and P. Traynor. Pindr0p: Using single-ended audio
features to determine call provenance. CCS ’10, pages 109–120,
New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

[10] M. Barth. M. barth, call termination on ott network, patent wo

2014087269 a4. Patent WO 2014087269 A4, 2014. Patent WO
2014087269 A4.

[11] M. D. Bhawan and J. L. N. Marg. Consultation paper on

regulatory framework for over-the-top (OTT) services. Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India, March 2015.

[12] C. Bignell. The diﬀerent frauds: Interconnect bypass. Revector,

Fraud for thought blog, August 2012.

[13] D. Bonﬁglio, M. Mellia, M. Meo, D. Rossi, and P. Tofanelli.

Revealing skype traﬃc: When randomness plays with you.
SIGCOMM, 2007.

[14] Y. Cheng, L. Ying, S. Jiao, P. Su, and D. Feng. Bind your

phone number with caution: Automated user proﬁling through
address book matching on smartphone. AsiaCCS’13, 2013.

[15] E. Chin, A. P. Felt, V. Sekar, and D. Wagner. Measuring user

conﬁdence in smartphone security and privacy. SOUPS ’12,
2012.

[16] E. Coll. Telecom 101: Third Edition. Teracom Training

Institute, 2008.

[17] J. Crook. Viber is testing new revenue models, value-add

features by integrating with traditional telephony. TechCrunch,
July 2013.

[18] L. Dryburgh and J. Hewett. Signaling System No. 7 (SS7/C7):

protocol, architecture, and services. Cisco press, 2005.

[19] S. Ehlert and S. Petgang. Analysis and signature of skype voip

session traﬃc. 2006.

[20] A. Elmi, S. Ibrahim, and R. Sallehuddin. Detecting sim box
fraud using neural network. In K. J. Kim and K.-Y. Chung,
editors, IT Convergence and Security 2012.

[21] eMarketer. Digital content and advertising key revenue

generators for messaging apps. emarketer, November 2015.

[22] T. Eyers and H. Schulzrinne. Predicting internet telephony call

setup delay. In First IP Telephony Workshop, 2000.

[23] C. Fiesler and A. Bruckman. Copyright terms in online creative

communities. In CHI, 2014.

[24] Fisher Investments. Fisher Investments on Telecom. Wiley,

2011.

[25] E. P. Freire, A. Ziviani, and R. M. Salles. Detecting skype ﬂows

in web traﬃc. In NOMS 2008, April 2008.

[26] J. Gozdecki, A. Jajszczyk, and R. Stankiewicz. Quality of

service terminology in IP networks. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 2003.

[27] M. Gruber, C. Schanes, F. Fankhauser, and T. Grechenig.
Voice calls for free: How the black market establishes free
phone calls - trapped and uncovered by a voip honeynet. In
IEEE Privacy, Security and Trust (PST) 2013.

[28] S. Guerraoui. Morocco banned skype, viber, whatsapp and

facebook messenger. it didn’t go down well. middleeasteye.net,
9/3/2016.

[29] S. Gupta, P. Gupta, M. Ahamad, and P. Kumaraguru. Abusing

phone numbers and cross-application features for crafting
targeted attacks. CoRR, abs/1512.07330, 2015.

[30] Network grade of service parameters and target values for

circuit switched public land mobile services, ITU, rec-e.771,
1996.

[31] Network grade of service parameters and target values for

circuit-switched services in the evolving ISDN, ITU, rec-e.721,
1999.

[32] ITU Study Group 3, Question 9/3. Ott bypass. International

Telecommunication Union: https:
//www.itu.int/itu-t/workprog/wp item.aspx?isn=10892#TOP,
march 2016. Editors: Rim Belhassine-Cherif and Chaﬁk
Jallouli.

[33] M. Korczynski and A. Duda. Classifying service ﬂows in the

encrypted skype traﬃc. In 2012 IEEE ICC, pages 1064–1068,
June 2012.

[34] Y.-L. Lai and K.-L. Hui. Internet opt-in and opt-out:

Investigating the roles of frames, defaults and privacy concerns.
In ACM SIGMIS CPR, 2006.

[35] J.-Y. Le Boudec. Performance evaluation of computer and

communication systems. Computer and communication
sciences. EPFL Press London, Lausanne, 2010.

[36] R. Likert. A technique for the measurement of attitudes.

Archives of Psychology, 142:1–55, 1932.

[37] S. J. Lupker, G. J. Fleet, and B. R. Shelton. Callers’

perceptions of post-dialling delays: the eﬀects of a new
signalling technology. Behaviour & Information Technology,
7(3):263–274, 1988.

[38] V. Mati´c, A. Lebl, D. Miti´c, and M. Duki´c. Estimation of post

dialling delay in telephone networks. Przeglad
Elektrotechniczny, R. 88, nr 5b:154–156, 2012.

[39] D. Medhi and K. Ramasamy. Network routing - algorithms,

protocols, and architectures. Morgan Kaufmann, 2007.

[40] I. Murynets, M. Zabarankin, R. P. Jover, and A. Panagia.

Analysis and detection of simbox fraud in mobility networks. In
INFOCOM, 2014.

[41] B. Reaves, E. Shernan, A. Bates, H. Carter, and P. Traynor.

Boxed out: Blocking cellular interconnect bypass fraud at the
network edge. In USENIX Security, 2015.

[42] J. S. Richters and C. A. Dvorak. A framework for deﬁning the

quality of communications services. Comm. Mag.,
26(10):17–23, oct 1988.

[43] S. Schrittwieser, P. Fruhwirt, P. Kieseberg, M. Leithner,
M. Mulazzani, M. Huber, and E. R. Weippl. Guess who’s
texting you? evaluating the security of smartphone messaging
applications. In NDSS, 2012.

[44] N. A. Wasmi. Telecoms regulator says viber is ’unlicensed’ in

the UAE, September 2014. The National UAE.

1117