Ad Blockers: Global Prevalence and Impact

Matthew Malloy+, Mark McNamara+, Aaron Cahn+, Paul Barford+†

{mmalloy,mmcnamara,acahn,pbarford}@comscore.com

+comScore, Inc.

†University of Wisconsin - Madison

ABSTRACT
Ad blockers are a formidable threat to the vitality of the on-
line advertising eco-system. Understanding their prevalence
and impact is challenging due to the massive scale and di-
versity of the eco-system. In this paper, we utilize unique
data gathering assets to assess the prevalence and impact of
ad blockers from an Internet-wide perspective. Our study is
based on (i) a 2 million person world-wide user panel that
provides ground truth for ad blocker installations and (ii)
telemetry from large number of publisher web pages and ads
served to publishers. We describe a novel method for assess-
ing the prevalence of ad blocker installations that is based
on Mixture Proportion Estimation. We apply this method to
nearly 2 trillion web transactions collected over the period of
1 month (February 2016), to derive ad blocker prevalence es-
timates for desktop systems in diverse geographic areas and
for diverse demographic groups. Next, using deployment es-
timates we consider the impact of ad blockers on users and
on publisher sites. Speciﬁcally, we report on the reduction of
ads shown to users with ad blockers installed and show that
even though a user may have an ad blocker installed, they are
still exposed to a signiﬁcant number of ads. We also char-
acterize the impact of ad blockers across different categories
of publisher sites including those that may be participating
in whitelisting [9].

1.

INTRODUCTION

An ad blocker, as the name suggests, offers the capability
to prevent ads from being delivered to a user’s browser. The
stated intent of entities that have developed ad blockers is to
enable users to surf the web without annoying ads. While
the deﬁnition of “annoying" is somewhat unclear, what is
clear is that these capabilities pose a signiﬁcant threat to the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is per-
mitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
IMC 2016, November 14-16, 2016, Santa Monica, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4526-2/16/11. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2987443.2987460

digital media ecosystem, which has delivered a wide range
of transformative services that have been funded by online
ads.

Ad blockers are typically implemented as plugins or browser

extensions that when installed, attempt to intercept and elim-
inate outgoing ad requests from a base web page 1. They use
a variety of mechanisms to identify ad requests. One of the
most common and effective mechanisms is to compare the
URLs in the embedded requests to a blacklist(s) of URLs
of ad servers and advertising platforms. If there is a match,
the blocker will prevent the request from being transmitted.
While a number of the most popular ad blockers are open
source and free to users, authors of these systems are now
monetizing their efforts by offering to whitelist certain ad-
vertisers and publishers [9].

While ad blockers have been available for over a decade,
they have been receiving signiﬁcant attention in the popu-
lar media over the past year. Given this attention, we seek
answers to several simple questions: what is the prevalence
of ad blocker installs in the internet? what is the behavior
of ad blockers when installed? and what is the impact to
publishers? Answers to these questions will help to clarify
the broader conversation about ad blockers and inform the
digital media ecosystem about how it can evolve.

There are two signiﬁcant challenges in addressing ques-
tions that focus on internet-wide population estimation. First,
it is difﬁcult to assemble data sets on browser conﬁgurations
that enable such estimates. Second, since it is impossible to
have ground truth for all browser conﬁgurations deployed on
all user systems, estimates based on a smaller population of
users is required. Care must be taken in any such estimate to
remove bias from the sample population.

In this paper we report results of our study of the preva-
lence and impact of ad blockers in the internet. Our anal-
yses is based on unique data assets that enable us to as-
sess ad blocker deployment and impact in a comprehensive
fashion that goes well beyond standard reports on blocker
downloads (e.g., Ad Block Plus [5]). The data assets include
census information from nearly 2 trillion web transactions
collected over a period of a month. This is complemented
by data collected over the same period of time from a 2M
person user panel (distributed across the internet) that ex-

1While the focus of this paper is the web, VPN-based ad
blockers are also available for mobile apps.

119poses all details of browser conﬁgurations. This panel data,
with ground truth information about ad blocker installs, is
the starting point for our study.

We posit that users who opt-in to participate in a world-
wide user panel that is speciﬁcally designed to track web
browsing and ad consumption are less likely to install and
enable an ad blocker. We develop a novel technique based
on Mixture Proportion Estimation (MPE) to quantify this ef-
fect. In particular, MPE enables the proportions of subpopu-
lations in a mixture to be estimated from samples. Our tech-
nique is based on the assumption that users with ad blockers
will see fewer ads than those without ad blockers. We be-
gin by separating panelists into two groups – those with and
those without ad blockers – and then quantify the ad display
rates for those groups. The ad display rates allow us to infer
the prevalence of ad blocking in the census data. Theoret-
ical guarantees in the form of conﬁdence ranges and statis-
tical signiﬁcance levels are provided. The MPE technique
employed in this paper enables, to the best of our knowl-
edge, the largest scale assessment of ad blocker deployment
to date.

2. DATA

In this section we provide an overview of the two sources

of data used in this study.

Panel. The comScore panel consists of 2 million users
worldwide who voluntarily install monitoring software in
exchange for various beneﬁts, including cloud storage, anti-
virus software, tree planting, and other cash prizes 2. The
panel provides measurements on panelist’s web browsing
behavior and internet use. When a panelist registers, they
voluntary provide their geographic location and demographic
information including age, sex, household income, etc.

The panel monitoring software is also able to observe in-
stallations of software on panelist’s computer. This enables
enumeration of web browser conﬁgurations including whether
or not ad block software packages are installed. We do this
by using search queries to build a list of popular ad block-
ers (e.g., Ad Block Plus, Ad Block, etc.)
for three ma-
jor browsers (e.g., Internet Explorer, Google Chrome, and
Mozilla Firefox) and then search for these names in the con-
ﬁguration data. The current lists include 10 ad blockers for
Internet Explorer, 20 ad blockers for Google Chrome, and 15
ad blockers for Mozilla Firefox. While we make no claims
that each list is complete, we argue that each include most
if not all of the widely reported blockers (which we quantify
in Section 4). We refer to the subset of panel users that have
an ad blocker installed as the panel percent ad block.

As with any widely recruited panel, bias can be intro-
duced when some populations ﬁnd the incentivized recruit-
ment more attractive than others. This is true of the com-
Score panel and the populations of internet users that do/don’t
use ad block software. Our intuition is that an individual who
voluntarily installs panel software on their machine is likely

2The panel
is 100% opt-in with thorough disclosure
on data privacy.
The privacy policy can be found at
http://www.comscore.com/About-comScore/Privacy-Policy.

to be less concerned with privacy – a trait that could correlate
with ad block installation. As we show, the panel is indeed
biased away from ad block usage. One of the key aspects
of our work is correcting this bias using the broader census
via MPE. For the purposes of estimating ad block usage in
the general internet population, the panel provides a data set
consisting of tuples of (i) a comScore browser cookie and (ii)
a binary label indicating the presence or absence of ad block-
ing software. Details of the MPE approach are provided in
Section 3.

Census. The comScore census network is one of the most
widely deployed internet census networks in the world. The
census network collects information daily on over 20 billion
page views across half a million top level domains. In ad-
dition, the census network collects data on over 2 billion ad
deliveries daily. This data is collected via JavaScript tags de-
ployed on publisher pages and JavaScript tags deployed with
advertisements. In both settings, a client machine executes
the tag locally and reports information directly to our data
warehouse. The information includes a cookie identiﬁer, a
timestamp, and the type of tag (e.g., page or ad).

Estimation of the prevalence of ad block usage across the
census network relies on counts of page and ad tags associ-
ated with individual cookies over the course of a month. In
particular, for each cookie present on the census network, the
count of page views and the count of ad deliveries is tallied
over the reporting period. The data gathered from the cen-
sus network are tuples consisting of (i) a comScore browser
cookie (ii) the count of tagged ads delivered to that browser
cookie and (iii) the count of tagged page views delivered
to that browser cookie. The data set under consideration is
reduced to ensure a longitudinal view of each cookie; specif-
ically, a cookie is excluded from the study if (i) it has fewer
than 200 pageviews or (ii) has not existed on the census net-
work for a minimum of 30 days.

Of the remaining cookies, a subset correspond to com-
Score panelists. This subset of cookies can be labeled as
associated or not associated with ad block software by com-
paring against the panel data set described above. Ultimately
this deﬁnes three disjoint populations of cookies: (i) the set
of labeled cookies associated with ad block software, de-
noted Sblock, (ii) the set of labeled cookies known to not be
associated with ad block software, denoted Sads, and (iii) the
set unlabeled cookies, denoted S.
Ad Ratio Statistic. The ad ratio statistic, deﬁned as the
number of ads delivered divided by the number of page views,
is computed on a cookie by cookie basis:

ad ratio =

count of ad deliveries
count of pageviews

(1)

This statistic, in aggregate, is closely tied to ad block usage
since it acts as an estimate of the number of ads delivered to
a user per unit of internet browsing. However, this statistic
alone is not sufﬁcient to infer if a user has or does not have an
ad blocker installed. First, in some cases users may browse
pages that do not deliver ads, and will have an ad statistic
equal to zero regardless of whether or not they have ad block
installed. Second, it is often the case that users with an ad

120blocker installed, either through disabling of the ad blocker
or whitelisting of ads [9], are shown some number of ads and
possibly many ads.

Ultimately the inherent restrictions of the data on hand
gives rise to two challenges: (i) the panel is biased away
from ad block usage and (ii) census data is insufﬁcient to re-
liably classify individual cookies as associated with ad block-
ing software. We address both of these challenges via the
MPE approach described below.

Cookies and Users. There are a number of important de-
tails and nuances pertaining to the precise deﬁnition of an
ad block user, and the relationship between users and cook-
ies. While the panel allows association of a user with ad
blocking software, it does not imply that the user actually
employed ad blocking software for the entire reporting pe-
riod. Instead, it simply indicates the presence of ad block-
ing software at some point during the reporting period. A
user may install ad block software and immediately disable
it entirely or more commonly install ad block software and
disable it on a subset of sites; in both cases the user would
still be considered an ad block user.
Deﬁnition - Ad block user: a person with one or more ad
blocking programs installed on their primary computer at
some point during the reporting period.

Second, when studying ad block prevalence in the cen-
sus network, ad blocking is associated directly with browser
cookies, not users.
In this study, there is nearly a one to
one correspondence between a user and a cookie. Using the
subset of cookies associated with the panel, the estimated
number of cookies per person was 1.03, sufﬁciently close to
1 to be omitted.

3. MIXTURE PROPORTION

ESTIMATION

Mixture proportion estimation (MPE) [8] is a technique
for ﬁnding the proportions of classes in unlabeled data sets.
While there are many variations, the basic problem setup
can be captured as follows. Let 1, . . . , k denote the classes,
and let P1, . . . , Pk be known, estimated, or otherwise re-
stricted class conditional probability distributions over a fea-
ture space. Given unlabeled data with a probability distribu-
tion P , and the estimates of the class conditional distribu-
tions, ﬁnd the relative proportion of each class in the unla-
beled data. In short, given P1, . . . , Pk, and P , ﬁnd propor-
tions π1, . . . , πk, such that

P =

πi Pi.

(2)

i=1

MPE is a powerful approach as it circumvents the need
for data classiﬁcation. The proportions of the classes are
inferred from the data in aggregate, permitting success even
when classiﬁcation error rates are prohibitively high. In con-
trast, a manifest and domineering approach to this problem
is to ﬁrst classify each data point, and then ﬁnd the propor-
tions of each class directly from the inferred classiﬁcation.
This approach is inherently limited by the error rates of the

k(cid:88)

classiﬁer; in the noisy, feature limited setting studied here,
where classiﬁcation would be based on the ad ratio statistic
alone, this approach can fail entirely.

tio statistic for cookies known to have one or more ad
blockers installed

In the context of estimation of ad blocking deployment,
the MPE approach relies on the distribution of the ad ra-
tio statistic associated with the three populations of cookies:
Sads, Sblock and S, corresponding to labeled cookies with-
out ad blocking software, labeled cookies with ad blocking
software, and unlabeled cookies. These populations deﬁne
three histograms over the ad ratio statistic:

1. (cid:98)Pads ∈ Rm – normalized histogram over the ad ra-
2. (cid:98)Pblock ∈ Rm – normalized histogram over the ad ratio
3. (cid:98)P ∈ Rm – normalized histogram of unlabeled com-
tains approximately the same number of cookies for (cid:98)P , i.e.,
(cid:3).
the boundaries of the bins are such that (cid:98)P ≈

statistic for cookies not associated with one or more ad
blockers,

Histograms are generated so that each of the m bins con-

Score cookies from the comScore census network.

With the three histograms as input, a single variable opti-
mization is run to ﬁnd the mixture proportion such that the
labeled histograms best align with the unlabeled histogram
according to (2). The procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1.

m , . . . , 1

(cid:2) 1

m

(cid:21)

(cid:20) 1

Algorithm 1 MPE for Ad Block Prevalence
1: Input: ad ratio statistics for cookies in Sads, Sblock, S.
2: Compute bin edges a1, . . . am−1 such that histogram of

ad ratio for S satisﬁes(cid:98)P ≈
3: Generate histograms (cid:98)Pblock, (cid:98)Pads, and (cid:98)P by binning
data according to [0, a1), [a1, a2) . . . [am−1,∞)
(cid:16)(cid:98)P , π (cid:98)Pblock + (1 − π)(cid:98)Pads
(cid:17)

4: Solve optimization:

= arg min
π∈[0,1]

, . . . ,

1
m

π∗

m

f

5: Output: estimate of proportion of users with ad block
software π∗ and signiﬁcance level (p-value) derived
from χ2 test

The algorithm returns the estimate of the proportion of
ad block users, denoted π∗. We refer to this value as the
MPE percent adblock. As equality in (2) is rarely if ever
satisﬁed for any mixture proportion, the mixture proportion
that results in the minimum objective function, f (·), between
the histograms is returned by the optimization.
the canonical L1

We employ three objective functions:

and L2 norms and the χ2 statistic, given by:

f (P, Q) = n

(Q(i) − P (i))2

P (i)

(3)

m(cid:88)

i=1

where n is the number of samples in histogram Q.

Validation via Signiﬁcance Testing. The underlying hy-

121pothesis of MPE is that unlabeled data are well represented
by a combination of the labeled datasets according to (2).
After the optimization is run, this hypothesis can be con-
ﬁrmed or rejected by asking, in the context of goodness of
ﬁt (GoF) testing, how well does the best mixture distribution,

π∗ (cid:98)Pblock +(1−π∗)(cid:98)Pads, match the data, (cid:98)P ? If the results of

the GoF test indicate that the histograms aren’t well matched
the original hypothesis is rejected, and the estimated propor-
tions are invalid.

The canonical GoF test for categorical data is Pearson’s
Chi-squared test [1]. In general, the Chi-squared test takes
the χ2 statistic and the number of samples associated with
the histogram under test as input, and outputs a p-value.
Note that in our setting, a high p-value is good, as it indi-
cates the data is well represented by the mixture distribution.
As both histograms are empirical, we consider the larger

dataset, (cid:98)P , to represent the theoretical frequencies, which

is a standard approach in GoF testing. When the χ2 statis-
tic is used as the objective, the GoF test is baked into the
optimization and MPE approach is equivalent to ﬁnding the
mixture proportions that result in the maximum p-value (i.e.,
the least statistically signiﬁcant outcome, the outcome that
best matches the data). We use Chi-squared tests to conﬁrm
the validity of the MPE approach on the various datasets.
4. RESULTS

This section presents estimates on the prevalence and im-
pact of ad blockers in the internet. More precisely, our MPE
approach was used to generate ad block percentages for key
geographies as shown in Table 1. From these percentages,
the MPE projection factor for each of the key geographies
was determined by dividing the MPE percent ad block, with
the χ2 objective, by the panel percent ad block. The MPE
approach can be applied to any arbitrary “breakout" (subset
of the overall population) by multiplying the projection fac-
tors by panel results for a target breakout. Due to space con-
siderations, we limit our analysis to several key breakouts in-
cluding (i) geographic, (ii) demographic, and (iii) publisher,
which highlights the impact of ad blockers in terms of po-
tential revenue loss.

To motivate and validate our MPE-based approach for this
problem we provide a visual representation for the underly-
ing distributions for ˆP , ˆPads, and ˆPblock for the US in Fig-
ure 1. Alongside these three histograms (e.g., the bottom
right histogram), we provide the histogram generated by us-
ing the α value that minimized the objective function in our
MPE algorithm. Visually, the success of the method is dic-
tated by how closely the histogram generated by the mix-
ture of ˆPads and ˆPblock matches the histogram of ˆP . Figure 1
shows that the two histograms match quite closely.
4.1 Geographic Breakout

Our geographic analysis of ad blocker prevalence consid-
ers the US, the UK, Germany, France, and Canada. These
countries were selected because they are all large digital ad-
vertising markets. Table 1 shows results of the MPE ap-
proach using L1, L2, and the χ2 statistic as the objective

Figure 1: The underlying distribution of the ad ratio statistic asso-
ciated with the three populations of cookies from Section 3: ˆPblock,
ˆPads, and ˆP . The bottom right histogram is the mixture combination
of ˆPads and ˆPblock utilizing the MPE approach. Visually, the success
of the method is dictated by how closely the histogram generated
by the mixture of ˆPads and ˆPblock matches the histogram of ˆP .

Figure 2: A heat map of ad blocker penetration on a state by state
in the US. Vermont has the highest ad blocker penetration at 23.6%
and Mississippi has the lowest at 9.9%.

functions. Ad block penetration in the US is 18% and varies
between 16% and 37% for other countries.

Within the US, we consider ad blocker installations on
state by state basis. Figure 2 quantiﬁes the ad block pene-
tration rates in a heat map. We ﬁnd that ad blocker penetra-
tion is greatest in Vermont (23.6%) and lowest in Mississippi
(9.9%).
4.2 Demographic Breakout

Figure 3 provides ad blocker penetration rates for key de-
mographic categories in Germany, the UK, and the US. Ad
blocker penetration is most prevalent among males 18-34.
This ﬁnding is consistent across all geographic areas with
Germany at 49%, the US at 29%, and the UK at 29%. The
18-34 age group is also consistently (across key geos) the
most prevalent ad blocker group among females with Ger-
many at 43%, the UK at 22%, and the US at 20%.

0.00.51.01.52.00.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7ˆPblock0.00.51.01.52.00.000.020.040.060.080.100.12ˆPads0.00.51.01.52.00.000.050.100.150.20ˆP0.00.51.01.52.00.000.050.100.150.20αˆPblock+(1−α)ˆPads0.1050.1200.1350.1500.1650.1800.1950.2100.225122Geo
US
UK
Germany
France
Canada

χ2

p

L2

L1
18% 18% 17% 0.10
16% 16% 17% 0.88
32% 32% 37% 0.56
29% 29% 32% 0.89
22% 22% 24% 0.52

Feb-16

95% Conﬁdence
nblock
15.7% - 18.6% 6,788
11.5% - 23.5% 2,200
28.4% - 46.6% 1,114
22.5% - 42.5% 1,133
18.5% - 30.5% 1,666

nad

52,368
11,952
2,142
3,016
6,033

ncensus

49,406,827
8,660,037
3,174,325
3,949,981
5,376,049

Table 1: The percentage of users with an ad blocker installed (the MPE percent ad block) in key geographies for the month of February.
Results from using L1, L2, and χ2 statistical distance with p-value as the objective function are shown. A high p-value indicates success
of MPE as it implies the resulting mixture distribution is not statistically signiﬁcant with respect to the unlabeled data. The 95% conﬁdence
values indicate the range for which the corresponding mixture distribution has a p-value greater than 0.05. The underlying size n of each

data set used in generating (cid:98)Pads, (cid:98)Pblock, and (cid:98)P are also provided.

Figure 3: Ad block penetration rates among key user demographic
categories for Germany, the UK, and the US.

4.3 Ad Block Market Share Analysis

As indicted in Section 2, there are a number of different ad
blockers available and in use today. A number of these report
their total installations. Thus, it is of interest to investigate
their relative market share, and our data and analytic method
allows us to estimate the prevalence of speciﬁc browsers/ad
blocker deployments. To quantify this, we focused on three
major browsers (e.g., Internet Explorer, Google Chrome, and
Mozilla Firefox). Figure 4 is a heat map of the relative mar-
ket share of the top three ad block offerings (as well as a
catch all Other category) across three major browsers.
It
is clear from Figure 4 the market is dominated by Adblock
Plus for both Firefox (95.2% averaged across geos) and In-
ternet Explorer (93.8% averaged across geos). For Google
Chrome, the market share is distributed fairly evenly be-
tween Adblock Plus (49.7% averaged across geos) and Ad-
block (56.9% averaged across geos). Note, the values for
a particular geo/browser pair will not sum to 1 as a single
panelist may have more than one ad block offering installed.
4.4 Publisher Breakout

The analysis in subsections 4.1 and 4.2 on ad blocker pen-
etration across key geographies and key demographics high-
lights the difference in ad block use among different popu-
lation segments. For instance, ad blocker penetration skews
toward young males. These users inherently carry bias in the
sites they are likely to visit. Thus, the percentage of users

Figure 4: A heat map showing the market share of the top three
ad block offerings across three major browsers (Internet Explorer,
Google Chrome, and Mozilla Firefox). Results are further stratiﬁed
across key geographies.

with an ad blocker installed can be markedly different from
site to site. To quantify this behavior and it’s associated im-
pact, we calculate the percentage of users with an ad blocker
installed across (i) ten publishers and (ii) the major publisher
segments. The ten publishers are a random selection of those
with large audiences that illustrate the scope of impact of ad
blockers. Publisher names have been removed to preserve
anonymity.

Table 2 provides the results for ten publishers. The per-
centage of users with an ad blocker installed ranges from
25.27% for Publisher H to 17.95% for Publisher B. Note,
Publishers A, B, D, E, and F appear in some form on Ad-
block Plus’s whitelist while Publishers C, G, H, I do not.

To further elucidate user ad block install behavior, we
ran the same analysis across publisher segments. The re-
sults of this analysis are shown in Table 3. The percentage
of users with an ad blocker installed are highest on XXX
Adult (24.74%) and lowest on Portals (17.77%). Notably,
ad blocker install rates among users visiting Sports, Tech-
nology, Entertainment, and News/Information segments is
quite similar. These segments represent sites where users
consume various forms of media and are therefore likely to
be confronted with advertisements that disrupt the consump-
tion of this media.
4.5 Ad Blocker Impact Analysis

It is clear from the previous subsection that a signiﬁcant
proportion of users employ ad blockers. However, only con-

GermanyUnited KingdomUnited States01020304050% Adblock35-50 Female50+ Female50+ Male18-34 Female18-34 Male35-50 MaleAdblock PlusAdblockAdblock ProOtherUSITDEFRUKInternet ExplorerAdblock PlusAdblockAdblock ProOtherChromeAdblock PlusAdblockAdblock ProOtherFirefox0.00.20.40.60.8123Publisher
Publisher A
Publisher B
Publisher C
Publisher D
Publisher E
Publisher F
Publisher G
Publisher H
Publisher I

% Ad block

users
19.52%
17.95%
21.09%
18.47%
21.96%
18.82%
21.43%
25.27%
23.00%

% Ad requests
blocked

Feb-16

AVad AVblock
0.08
0.57
1.49
0.72
0.17
0.31
0.55
0.76
0.22

18.99% 0.23
5.17% 0.95
5.82% 1.95
7.76% 1.33
14.63% 0.40
8.06% 0.69
16.21% 1.81
16.07% 2.10
14.42% 0.70

Ad blocker
exposure rate
0.34
0.60
0.76
0.54
0.42
0.44
0.30
0.36
0.31

Potential

revenue loss
$1,550,138
$508,534
$3,904,207
$1,575,406
$183,531
$190,625
$195,651
$170,779
$121,581

Table 2: Publisher breakout. Publisher names have been anonymized. The table shows the percent of ad block users and the percentage of ad
requests blocked. AVads and AVads are the number of ads shown per page view to ad block users and non-users. The ad blocker exposure
rate is the number of ads delivered to an ad block user per ad delivered to a non-blocker. Lastly, estimated potential revenue lost due to ad
block usage is shown.

Feb-16

Publisher segment % Ad Block users

Automotive
Entertainment

Games
Lifestyles

News/Information

Portals

Search/Navigation

Sports

Technology
XXX Adult

18.82%
20.21%
22.30%
20.56%
20.21%
17.77%
18.12%
20.91%
20.04%
24.74%

Table 3: The percent of users with an ad blocker installed by pub-
lisher segment.

sidering users ignores two important factors: (i) ad block
users (could) still be exposed to a signiﬁcant number of ads
due to whitelisting and disabling and (ii) different classes of
users have different browsing behaviors.

To capture these effects, we considered the ad blocker ex-
posure rate, which is interpreted as the number of ads shown
to an ad block user per ad shown to a non-block user. Table
3 and Table 2 show the ad blocker exposure rate, computed
as AVblock/AVads, where AVblock and AVad are the number
of ads per page view shown to ad block users and non-users.
Additionally, we calculated the percentage of ad requests
blocked and the potential revenue lost for ten publishers.
The revenue lost assumes a modest $1 CPM (cost per thou-
sand ads shown, selected arbitrarily). The calculation of the
ad requests blocked is outlined here:

1. compute X, the percentage of ad block users, as panel
percent ad block on publisher A multiplied by the MPE
projection factor for the geo of interest

2. multiply X by the total number of users on publisher
A, which gives an estimate of the number of ad block
users on publisher A, denoted Y

3. from panel data, compute the average page views per
ad block user for publisher A, and multiply by Y to get
Z, the number of page views from ad block users on
publisher A

4. from panel data, compute the average number of ads
shown per page view to ad block users (AVblock) and
the average number of ads shown per page view to non-
block users (AVad)

Feb-16

Country Ad Blocker Exposure Rate
Canada
France
Germany

0.46
0.35
0.51
0.45
0.49
0.60

Italy
UK
US

Table 4: Ad blocker exposure rate. The ad blocker exposure rate is
the number of ads delivered to an ad block user per ad delivered to
a non-ad block user.

5. compute blocked impressions as Z×(AVads−AVblock)
The potential revenue lost Rlost using a $1 CPM (cost per
thousand ads shown, selected arbitrarily) for the ten publish-
ers is found in Table 2. The intermediary values for AVad
and AVblock are also found in Table 2. Even with a modest
$1 CPM, it is clear that ad blockers have a signiﬁcant impact
on revenue lost for publishers (e.g., $3.9M/mo. for Publisher
C to $120K/mo. for Publisher I).

5. RELATED WORK

A study of general aspects of the ad serving ecosystem
is reported in [2]. That paper highlights the impact of user-
targeting in online advertising as well as the broad range of
ads that are delivered to different types of publishers. Nath
presents a similar study, which is focused on advertising
in the mobile app space [4]. More speciﬁc to ad block-
ers, Walls et al. [9] provide a comprehensive analysis of
Adblock Plus’s Acceptable Ads (i.e., whitelisting) program.
This study directly informs our work with respect to the issue
of whitelisting by ad blockers. In one of the few academic
studies on the topic, Pujol et al. [7] use passive measure-
ments on a residential broadband network to infer ad block
users and classify the impact of ad blockers on HTTP traf-
ﬁc. Our work is based on different datasets and employs
different methods to infer ad blocker use. Recently, Post
and Sekharan investigated the capabilities of 3 popular ad
blocker via source code analysis [6]. Finally, there continue
to be many reports in the popular press on ad blocker preva-
lence. Most of these are based on data provided (e.g., [3])
by entities that work with publishers to deploy a page-based

124detector. Our work provides a complementary perspective
based on instrumentation deployed widely throughout the
internet.
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we used two unique data sets to estimate the
prevalence and impact of ad blockers in the internet. We use
mixture proportion estimation to remove bias from a world-
wide user panel that provides ground truth on ad blocker in-
stalls.

Our results show that in the US, 18% of users have ad
blockers installed; up to 37% of users have ad blockers in-
stalled in other key geographies. Males 18-34 are the most
likely users of ad blockers in all geographies studied, with
49% using ad blocking software in Germany. Users with the
highest income levels are the most likely users of ad block-
ers in all geographies studied. Results show that Adblock
Plus is the most widely used ad blocker. Ad blockers are
most prevalent on Chrome, followed by Firefox. Users with
ad blockers see roughly half as many ads that users without
ad blockers see. Estimated monthly revenue lost due to ad
blockers on 10 large publisher sites varies between $3.9M
and $120K (assumes $1 CPM).

While the the results in this paper help further the under-
standing of ad block prevalence and impact, we would be re-
miss to not mention two inherent limitations. First, internet-
wide population or behavior estimation can never be shown
to be completely accurate due to scale, complexity and dy-
namics. However, we argue that our methodology that in-
cludes conﬁdence ranges, enables results to be more effec-
tively judged and interpreted. Second, our reliance on pro-
prietary datasets by deﬁnition limits the repeatability of our

experiments. In future work, we intend to address these lim-
itations by continuing to reﬁne our analytic capabilities, and
to consider how ad blocker prevalence might be measured in
a way that does not rely on proprietary data.

7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Agresti and M. Kateri. Categorical Data Analysis.

Springer, 2011.

[2] P. Barford, I. Canadi, D. Krushevskaja, Q. Ma, and

S. Muthukrishnan. Adscape: Harvesting and Analyzing
Online Display Ads. In Proceedings of the 23rd World
Wide Web Conference, Seoul, Korea, April 2014.

[3] S. Blanchﬁeld. PageFair, 2016. https://pagefair.com.
[4] S. Nath. MAdScope: Characterizing Mobile In-App

Targeted Ads. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual
International Conference on Mobile Systems,
Applications, and Services, Florence, Italy, May 2015.
[5] W. Palant. Adblock plus, 2016. http://adblockplus.org.
[6] E. Post and C. Sekharan. Comparative Study and

Evaluation of Online Ad-Blockers. In Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Information
Science and Security, Seoul, Korea, December 2015.

[7] E. Pujol, O. Hohlfeld, and A. Feldmann. Annoyed

Users: Ads and Ad-Block Usage in the Wild. In
Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement
Conference, Tokyo, Japan, October 2015.

[8] C. Scott. A Rate of Convergence for Mixture

Proportion Estimation, with Application to Learning
from Noisy Labels. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Statistics, San Diego, CA, May 2015.

[9] R. Walls, E. Kilmer, N. Lageman, and P. McDaniel.
Measuring the Impact and Perception of Acceptable
Advertisements. In Proceedings of the ACM Internet
Measurement Conference, Tokyo, Japan, October 2015.

125