On the Free Bridge Across the Digital Divide:

Assessing the Quality of Facebook’s

Free Basics Service

Rijurekha Sen†

Hasnain Ali Pirzada

(cid:72)
David Choffnes‡
†Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS)

(cid:72)
(cid:5)University of Cape Town (cid:91)LUMS (cid:63)IIT Kharagpur

Satadal Sengupta(cid:63)

Amreesh Phokeer(cid:5)

Zaid Ahmed Farooq(cid:91)

Krishna P. Gummadi†

University of Wisconsin-Madison

‡Northeastern University

ABSTRACT
Free Basics is an initiative backed by Facebook to provide
users in developing countries free mobile Internet access to
selected services. Despite its wide-spread deployment and
its potential impact on bridging the digital divide, to date,
few studies have rigorously measured the quality of the free
Internet service offered by Free Basics. In this short paper,
we characterize the quality of the Free Basics service offered
in Pakistan and South Africa along three dimensions: (i) the
selection of accessible Web services, (ii) the functionality of
those services, and (iii) the network performance for those
services. While preliminary, our ﬁndings show that data-
driven studies are essential for having more informed public
debates on the pros and cons of the current design of the Free
Basics service.
1.
Internet.org [1] is a consortium founded and led by Face-
book since 2013 with the goal of bringing affordable In-
ternet access to everyone in the world. Free Basics is the
ﬂagship initiative by Internet.org, offering free access to se-
lect Web services in partnership with mobile (cellular) ser-
vice providers in developing and under-developed countries
around the world. As of May 12th 2016, Free Basics has
been deployed in over 40 countries in Africa, Asia, and Cen-
tral and South America, with a total population of over 1.26
billion (22% of world’s population) [2].1 Compared to de-
veloped countries, these countries have low Internet pene-
1Free Basics’ deployment is also rapidly expanding with
eight countries, including Nigeria with 180 million people,

INTRODUCTION

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is per-
mitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
IMC 2016, November 14-16, 2016, Santa Monica, CA, USA
c(cid:13) 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4526-2/16/11. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2987443.2987485

tration rates (on average less than 20.4% of their population
access the Internet) [3]. However, mobile phone usage rates
in these countries are very high (on average about 101.7%2
[4]), making mobile phone users a ripe target for expanding
Internet usage. Free Basics, if successfully deployed world-
wide, has the potential to bridge the digital divide [5].

Our study of Free Basics is motivated by the following
high-level question: Free Basics is free, but at what qual-
ity? Today, beyond the limited information provided by Free
Basics themselves, there is little measurement data on the
quality of Free Basics services or how the service quality is
affected by Free Basics’ design. As we show in this work,
gathering data on Free Basics is challenging as existing mea-
surement infrastructures that use the traditional Internet (e.g.,
PlanetLab [6] and Measurement-Lab [7]) cannot reach into
or be reached from the walled Internet of Free Basics ser-
vices and users. However, data-driven studies of Free Basics
are necessary to help inform the public debates about Free
Basics, which in early 2016, have led to Indian telecommu-
nication regulators blocking Free Basics to over a billion po-
tential users [8, 9].

Figure 1: Free Basics architecture

How Free Basics works Before we outline the research ques-
tions motivating our study, it is useful to understand the ser-
vice architecture of Free Basics. As shown in Figure 1,
the Free Basics service comprises three independent service
providers: (i) network service provider: the cellular carri-
ers that agree to carry data for any Free Basics service at no

added to the list between May 1st and Aug 15th 2016.
2>100% because people can have multiple subscriptions

127cost to the end user, (ii) Free Basics proxy service provider:
all Free Basics trafﬁc is routed via proxies that are currently
run by Facebook, and (iii) web service providers: to have
their services accessed by Free Basics users, web site oper-
ators are required to ﬁrst re-design their services following
a set of technical requirements [10] and next apply to have
their service approved by the proxy service provider [11].
The Free Basics platform is open to include any web service
that meets the stated technical requirements (e.g., absence
of JavaScript, high resolution images, videos or iFrames).3
Such restrictions are put in place to support the target popu-
lation of mobile users in developing regions, where mobile
devices may not have full Web browsers and must access the
Internet via WAP or similar technologies [12].

Any mobile subscriber of the participating network ser-
vice providers can access (free of charge) the list of approved
web services by going to freebasics.com using their
mobile browser or by installing the Free Basics mobile ap-
plication [13] (while connected to their cellular provider’s
network).
Our goal: Assess the QoS of Free Basics In this paper, our
focus is on understanding the impact of Free Basics architec-
ture on the Quality-of-Service (QoS) offered by Free Basics
in practice. Speciﬁcally, we assess the QoS offered by the
three service providers comprising Free Basics:

1. Proxy service: We characterize the selection of web

services accessible via proxy on Free Basics.

2. Web services: We compare the functionalities of web
services tailored for Free Basics to their unmodiﬁed
versions on the Internet.

3. Network service: We analyze the network performance
(measured as bandwidth, latency, and page download
times) for Free Basics trafﬁc compared to that for paid
trafﬁc to the same site on the same carrier.

We perform the above analyses using data from a prelim-
inary study of Free Basics deployments in two countries,
namely Pakistan and South Africa. The data for our study
was gathered between April and August 2016. At a high-
level, our measurements show that while several tens of web
services are accessible on Free Basics, their functionality is
somewhat restricted and the network performance for Free
Basics trafﬁc is poor (compared to paid network access).
We highlight opportunities for a more informed public de-
bate with our ﬁndings. However, we do not think that our
measurement results by themselves are sufﬁcient to make a
strong case for or against FreeBasics. We conclude the paper
by outlining our future plans for extending this work.

2. MEASUREMENT METHODOLOGY
To assess the QoS of the three service providers comprising
Free Basics, we need to gather data on (a) the set of Free
Basics web services, (b) the webpages of these services to
3We validated this using our own web service submission.

analyze the functionality they offer and the network perfor-
mance while downloading them, and (c) the webpages of
the same web services on the normal Internet, to compare
the QoS of a Free Basics service with the QoS of the normal
version (using paid access).4

To collect the above data, we need to access Free Basics
service providers. However, we found that access to Free
Basics (including its proxies and web services) is restricted
to mobile devices registered with a cellular service provider
(i.e., with a SIM) in a country where it is offered. These
restrictions make measuring Free Basics challenging as no
network measurements from a machine outside of a Free
Basics provider can reach a Free Basics proxy or the sites
it serves. To measure Free Basics, at a minimum we need
a physical mobile device connected to an appropriate Free
Basics network provider in the country where it is deployed.

Figure 3: Experimental setup

Experimental setup To measure Free Basics, we create ex-
perimental testbeds in the Lahore University of Management
Sciences in Pakistan and University of Cape Town in South
Africa. The authors from each of these two locations set up a
smartphone with the necessary SIM connection. This smart-
phone acts as a Wi-Fi hotspot with a desktop tethered to it.
We use a remote connection to the desktop to measure Free
Basics via crawler scripts (with browser user-agent spoofed
to an appropriate mobile web browser) and network moni-
toring tools. We show this as a diagram in Figure 3.
Data gathered Using our testbed, we gathered the follow-
ing data: (a) the list of all web services accessible via Free
Basics in both Pakistan and South Africa; (b) the home-
pages of all web services available in Pakistan and some
additional pages for a subset of services for network per-
formance analysis (described in more detail in Section 3.3),
and (c) the pages for the normal Internet versions of the
same services, over the same cellular provider but with paid
network connection (where downloads count against a data
plan unlike Free Basics content). We extracted the URLs for
downloading the normal Internet versions of the web ser-
vices from their corresponding Free Basics URLs in an au-
tomated way.5

common

4Throughout this paper we use the term normal to refer to
sites outside of the Free Basics ecosystem.
5Currently,
a
[subdomains-separated-by-dashes]-[domain]-
[tld].0.freebasics.com/[URI]?iorg_service_id_internal=[...]",
is
where
corresponding
“http[s]://subdomain.domain.tld/URI”.
exam-
ple,
https://http-example-
com.0.freebasics.com/test/?...
can be converted to the
non zero-rated version http://example.com/test.

URLs
use
"https://http[s]-

URL
For

the

Free Basics URL

Free

Basics

format,

the

128(a) Service categories

(b) Service relevance

Figure 2: Categories of Free Basics services in Pakistan and South Africa

3. ASSESSING QOS OF FREE BASICS
In this section, we characterize the selection of Free Basics
web services and compare the functionality and network ac-
cess quality of these web services to their normal Internet
counterparts (using paid access).
3.1 Selection of accessible web services
We explore the web services accessible via Free Basics de-
ployments in Pakistan and South Africa. As of May 2016,
there are 74 services in Pakistan and 101 in South Africa.
The service listing in each country comes with a brief de-
scription of what each service does. We use these descrip-
tions to manually categorize the services according to their
functionality, as shown in Figure 2(a). We see a signiﬁcant
fraction of services in the education, news, health, network-
ing, entertainment and jobs categories.

We further manually categorize services according to whether

they are relevant to a global audience, country-speciﬁc audi-
ence (local), or to an audience in a developing region (Ta-
ble 1). Figure 2(b) shows the proportion of services in each
relevance category. We also split the services based on whether
they are available in both countries, or only in one speciﬁc
country. The ﬁgure shows that a signiﬁcant fraction of glob-
ally relevant services are available in both countries, and that
Pakistan’s Free Basics menu has a higher proportion of lo-
cally relevant services compared to South Africa.

Relevant context
global

developing

local

Characteristics
news, education, technical-knowhow,
search etc., that are useful
to anyone in the world
information on manual farming,
sanitation education, e.g.,
protection against mosquitoes and
viruses (Malaria, Zika, Ebola, HIV)
news, entertainment, retail
information, etc., that are locally
relevant, mostly with native language support

Table 1: Categorization criteria for Free Basics services

based on relevance

Figure 4(a) and (b) characterize the popularity of the Free
Basics services, based on the Alexa website rankings for

that country. Figure 4(c) characterizes the services based
on their global popularity. The ﬁgures show that very pop-
ular content globally (presumably the “basics” in Free Ba-
sics) is often included in Free Basics, including Facebook,
Wikipedia, Bing and BBC. However, these popular sites ac-
count for a small fraction (≈20%) of the available services,
while other services included in Free Basics fall below the
top 2000 globally popular services, or top 500 nationally
popular services, as ranked by Alexa. Another interesting
thing to see is how the service list grows over time. We de-
tail such future works in Section 4.

A key take-away is that many globally/nationally popular
services do not participate in Free Basics, but a wide variety
of sites across multiple categories do. An important question
is whether services with these characteristics (small number
of globally and nationally popular services) are considered
useful to Free Basics users. Answering this question re-
quires ﬁeld studies with Free Basics users, which is beyond
the scope of this work.

Interestingly, we ﬁnd about 5% of the combined services
in Pakistan and South Africa, to be somewhat dubious. These
are listed as “spam” in Figure 2(a)). Table 2 lists these web-
sites and the reason why we consider them dubious. Some of
these services are not available, returning an HTTP 404 er-
ror. Others generate ISP warnings that accessing the service
will incur data charges, even though they should be acces-
sible at no charge as part of Free Basics. Finally, there is
the case of an unremarkable individual’s personal Facebook
page,6 included as a Free Basics service.

Service
002CoSMos,
newsbyte.org,
roktim.net16.net, techhints.in
VOA news,
bolloywood-
king.in, mujahid islam
www.facebook.com/***

Description
HTTP 404 error on homepage

Data warning on homepage

Personal Facebook page
Table 2: Dubious Free Basics services in Pakistan

These examples suggest that the consortium that decides
the list of services to be part of Free Basics might not nec-
essarily be checking the services beyond ensuring that they
6The username is elided for privacy reasons.

 0 5 10 15 20 25PromotionsSearchWomenReligionRetailActivismSpamTechnicalJobsEntertainmentNetworkingHealthNewsEducationalPercentage of  Free Basics servicesPakistanSouth Africa 0 20 40 60 80 100bothonly-Pakistanonly-South-AfricaNumber of of Free Basics servicesglobaldevelopinglocal129(a) Services in Alexa top 500

(Pakistan)

(b) Services in Alexa top 500

(c) Services in Alexa top 2000

Figure 4: Popularity of Free Basics services in Pakistan and South Africa

(South Africa)

(Global)

meet the technical requirements. While additionally control-
ling content for quality may seem reasonable at face value,
and important concern is how to do so without the perception
(or realization) of censorship. We believe this to be an im-
portant issue needing careful attention as Free Basics grows.
3.2 Functionality of accessible web services
To understand the impact of Free Basics’ technical require-
ments for participation on service quality, we compare the
Free Basics versions of services with their normal Internet
counterparts. Speciﬁcally, we download the homepages of
all Free Basics services in Pakistan, for both the Free Basics
and the normal Internet version.

We test these sites using URLs that correspond to the same
content available both in the paid and the free versions of the
web services, thus enabling an apples-to-apples comparison.
The structure of these corresponding URLs is described in
Section 2. A concern is that the content for Free Basics and
paid versions of the site may differ due to caching at the Free
Basics proxy. We tested and found no evidence of caching;
rather, the main content was identical (except for changes
such as elimination of JavaScript).
Effect of technical speciﬁcations: Figure 5(a) shows a CDF
of the ratio of the sizes of these homepages, normal com-
pared to Free Basics. We observe that 80% of the services
have at least bigger sizes and potentially richer content for
the paid version, compared to the Free Basics version. E.g.
MashAllah ElecTronics and Pharmaceutical
Guidelines are 15x-18x larger in the normal versions.
This difference can be attributed to high resolution images
and multiple JavaScript ﬁles in the paid version, while only
small images and no JavaScript are present in their Free Ba-
sics counterparts.

Further inspection of the services’ homepages reveals the
absence of any contextual and embedded advertisements in
the Free Basics version of the services. The lack of adver-
tisements is possibly due to the restriction on using JavaScript,
which is commonly used to fetch and display ads. This re-
striction raises the interesting question of economic incen-
tives of the web service providers, who might ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to monetize their services in Free Basics.

The technical speciﬁcations are put in place to support
the target population of mobile users in developing regions,

where mobile devices may not have full Web browsers and
must access the Internet via WAP or similar technologies [12].
However, the functional restrictions on Free Basics services
and their implications for the number of sites participating
(and the content they provide) require further investigation
and discussion. For example, determining whether the users
like the offered services, despite functional restrictions, will
require ﬁeld studies with Free Basics users.
Effect of walled garden: Free Basics offers a limited set
of services; accessing any Internet destination beyond that
set is not blocked but will incur charges, with appropriate
warnings shown to the user. To understand the impact of
this “walled garden” on the user, we approximated the size
of the “garden” by visiting every link from the homepage
of every Free Basics service to determine whether the result
was a warning page indicating that the visited link is outside
of Free Basics.

Figure 5(b) plots the CDF of the percentage of URLs linked
in the homepage of the Free Basics services in Pakistan that
are outside the Free Basics domain and give data warnings.
There are some services like Accuweather, BBC and ESPN
on the left, which are mostly self-contained. However, 60%
of the services have external links, which will cause breaks
in the user browsing experience.
In some cases, such as
VirtualpediatricHospital.org,
SumirBD.mobi, 80-90% of the listed URLs are external
links—rendering such services effectively useless.

An interesting example of this comes from the Bing search
engine, which is part of Free Basics in both South Africa
and Pakistan. Table 3 shows the result for ﬁve representative
searches in Pakistan, the number of results returned for each
search, and number of those results that are accessible using
Free Basics. The key take-away is that the vast majority of
Bing search results cannot be followed by Free Basics users
without incurring data charges.

Interestingly, we observe that it should be relatively easy
to modify search output to rank the results based on their
accessibility within Free Basics. This would improve the
user experience for all the queries in Table 3, as Free Ba-
sics has signiﬁcant number of services related to education,
news, health and job portals. This trade-off between offer-
ing a good user experience while keeping users restricted
within the walled garden vs. offering some tantalizing con-

 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550CDFRanking of Free Basics services  within Alexa top 500 websites for PakistanFacebookUrdupointBlogspotWikipediaHamariwebBBCBingIlmkidunyaWikihowTelenorMustakbilAccuweatherMessengerThesaurusDictionary 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550CDFRanking of Free Basics services  within Alexa top 500 websites for South AfricaFacebookWikipediaGumtreeBingNews24OlxBlogspotSupersportAskAutotraderBBCCareers24WikihowThesaurusGoalAccuweatherDictionaryHealth24MirrorWattpad 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200CDFRanking of Free Basics services  within Alexa top 2000 websites for the worldFacebookWikipediaBingBlogspotAskBBCESPNWikihowAccuweatherThesaurusMessengerDictionaryOlxGoalWattpadGumtreeNairalandAutoraderHamariwebPakistanSouth AfricaBoth130(a) Ratio of homepage sizes

(b) External links at home page of

(c) CDF of page fetch speeds

Figure 5: Functionality and network quality of Free Basics services in Pakistan and South Africa

Free Basics services

Search query

Top universities in Pakistan
Pakistan news
Cricket

#results in
ﬁrst page
10
13
13

#Free Basics results
in ﬁrst page
2 (both Wikipedia)
0
2 (1 Cricinfo,
1 Wikipedia)
1 (Wikipedia)
0

Dengue prevention
Jobs in Pakistan
Table 3: Functional breaks with limited number of Free
Basics services returned by traditional search engines

10
10

tent out of reach of the free program to give users a glimpse
of the potential of the broader Internet, is open for debate.
Again, determining the merits of these approaches requires
ﬁeld studies.
3.3 Network performance
To measure the network service quality of Free Basics ser-
vices, we take three representative services in Pakistan - BBC,
Cricinfo and Mustakbil (a Pakistani job portal) and perform
the following experiment. We download the landing page of
each service and also all pages linked to this ﬁrst page. We
start this download simultaneously for the Free Basics ver-
sion of the service, and the normal mobile version with the
paid connection. We log the download time and the size for
each page, which are used for head-to-head comparison be-
tween these Free Basics services and their paid counterparts.
We do the same experiment for BBC Free Basics and BBC
paid versions in South Africa.
Page fetch speeds Figure 5(c) shows the CDF of network
speeds observed for the two versions of the same services.
The CDF is computed over 346 HTML pages of the Free
Basics version and 560 HTMLs of the normal version in
Pakistan and 155 HTML pages of Free Basics version and
166 HTMLs of normal version in South Africa.

We see a marked difference in the two speed distributions
in Pakistan, the median speed being 4 times slower for Free
Basics (80 Kbps), compared to the paid version of the same
service (320 Kbps). The curve for the paid services shows
a wide range of speeds typical of cellular broadband access,
and indicating that the provider has a capacity greater than
1Mbps. However, Free Basics downloads never experience
more than 128 Kbps, strongly suggesting that Free Basics
trafﬁc is throttled to a fraction of capacity.

The difference between the paid and free versions of BBC
in South Africa is less than that in Pakistan. Still, in South
Africa too, the free version never exceeds 600 Kbps, while
the paid version sees more than double those peak speeds. In
both Pakistan and South Africa, it is difﬁcult to attribute per-
formance differences to carrier-imposed throttling, proxy-
imposed throttling, or path inﬂation on the path that includes
the proxy. Isolating the source is part of our ongoing work.
Page fetch times Figure 6 shows the effect of download
speeds on user experience, the metric being page fetch times.
For the four services, we see a median increase of 2 to 6 sec-
onds in the page fetch times. The difference in page fetch
times is also service dependent, Cricinfo seeing the worst
delay followed by BBC and Mustakbil. This ordering fol-
lows the page size distribution of the services, where Free
Basics version of Cricinfo had the largest pages, followed
by BBC and Mustakbil. Thus services with richer content
will lead to a substantially worse user experience.

Figure 6: CDF of page fetch times by service

We tested whether different services within the same coun-
try saw differential service, and found no evidence of this
(i.e., Free Basics performance was neutral with respect to
service). Speciﬁcally, we compared performance between
downloads of similar-sized pages from different services (not
shown), and did not see any performance differences across
the services.
Effect of proxy Xu et al. [14] found that the relative network
locations of proxies between clients and servers can signif-
icantly impact performance. We ping the IP addresses con-

 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18CDFRatio of page sizes between normal and Free Basics versions  of the same service 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100CDFPercentage of external links (non-free links)AccuWeatherWikipediaMalaria No MoreBBC NewsWikihowGeo.tvTOEFL tipsESPNKPK Exchange Services Pvt LtdPakistan Learning CenterPharmaceutical GuidelinesAnatomyAtlas.orgVirtualpediatricHospital.orgBingBanglarFrameAZCorp ComicsSumirBD.mobi 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 500 1000 1500 2000CDFSpeed (Kbps)Free Bascis PakistanNormal PakistanFree Basics South AfricaNormal South Africa 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 5 10 15 20 25CDFPage load time (secs)BBC-freeCricinfo-freeMustakbil-freeBBC-free South AfricaBBC-normalCricinfo-normalMustakbil-normalBBC-normal South Africa131country

Pakistan

freebasics.com

average ping delay

(ms)
326.8

direct website

average ping delay

(ms)

bbc.com - 297.15

cricinfo.com - 76.515
mustakbil - 346.25
bbc.com - 460.5

South Africa
Table 4: Difference in ping delays between the Free Basics proxy and direct access to the web services

714.12

494

freebasics.com

direct website

minimum ping delay minimum ping delay

(ms)
299

(ms)
189
54.4
315
255

tacted for freebasics.com trafﬁc to understand their network
distance from clients. Interestingly, the reverse DNS name
for these IPs is a hostname ending with facebook.com or
fb.com (which veriﬁes the proxy based architecture in Fig-
ure 1 as documented by Facebook). We issue traceroutes and
use city codes in reverse DNS records for last-hop router IPs
to determine that the proxies we observed for Pakistan are in
Europe and those for South Africa are in the US.

Table 4 shows the ping latency from our client in Pakistan
to the proxy, and also to the servers hosting the normal ver-
sions of BBC, Cricinfo and Mustakbil. As seen from the
table, the delay to the Free Basics proxy is relatively high
(300 ms), largely due to the proxy being located in Europe
(about 5000 miles from the client in Pakistan). This delay
is six times larger than the delay to cricinfo.com, which is
hosted in Pakistan, and more than 50% higher than the la-
tency to bbc.com (likely hosted in Asia). Interestingly, the
delay to mustakbil is essentially the same as to the Free Ba-
sics proxy, likely indicating that the service is hosted in Eu-
rope. Similar differences in ping delays are seen in South
Africa, between the Free Basics proxy and the direct access
to bbc.com.

Taken together, the performance results indicate that Free
Basics users see poorer network performance to free sites
than to paid ones. Whether this performance is tolerable to
most users, and whether this is an acceptable price to pay for
free service, requires further investigation with user studies
and policy makers.
4. DISCUSSIONS & FUTURE WORK
This section further discusses the pros and cons of the Free
Basics design. We also outline our plans to scale our current
study and highlight some important aspects of Free Basics
that are beyond the scope of this paper, but merit attention in
future studies.
Is gate-keeping by proxy necessary? One of the widely de-
bated Free Basics design choices relates to the gate-keeper
role played by Facebook. Though we agree that the technical
speciﬁcations are well-justiﬁed (e.g., needed to make the ser-
vices accessible to resource-constrained feature-phone users),
it is unclear why these cannot be enforced by a basic transcod-
ing proxy that strips web services of excess functionality
(e.g., JavaScript) on the ﬂy to match the desired technical
speciﬁcations [10]. Such a design would alleviate the need
for individual web service operators to redesign their ser-
vices and separately request Facebook to approve their ser-
vices. From a user’s perspective, such a design would tear

down the wall around Free Basics services, make most tradi-
tional Internet services accessible, and signiﬁcantly improve
the user experience by limiting the number of broken (paid)
links, when browsing (see Section 3.2).

While the transcoding proxy described above has the po-
tential to open up the walled garden of Free Basics services,
it might raise incentive concerns for network service providers
(who might see a steep decline in the conversion rate of their
Free Basics users to paid users7).

Furthermore, the decision to have all Free Basics trafﬁc
transit via the proxy raises two important concerns. First,
as shown in Section 3.3, the proxies are often located (geo-
graphically) far from the Free Basics users and web servers,
contributing to increased round-trip times and page down-
load times for Free Basics users. Second, the proxy ser-
vice provider has access to all, mostly unencrypted, end-
user trafﬁc. As an example of some of the potential pri-
vacy risks, the URIs exposed to Free Basics revealed in-
formation such as user locations (e.g. from weather query
patterns in services like Accuweather) and political interests
(e.g.
from news browsing patterns in services like BBC).
As the proxy provider, Facebook states that they only in-
spect domain names and trafﬁc volumes, and that they (cu-
riously) store any cookies “in an encrypted and unreadable
format” [10].
Is Free Basics violating net neutrality? Many have raised
network neutrality concerns regarding Free Basics, most no-
tably in India [8, 9]. We found that in the two examples of
Free Basics deployments that we studied, trafﬁc for Free Ba-
sics received much worse performance than normal (paid)
Internet trafﬁc; however, all content within Free Basics re-
ceived the same performance. Whether this constitutes a net
neutrality violation is a matter of policy and is beyond the
scope of this work. Another aspect of Free Basics that im-
pacts net neutrality is differential pricing for content. In this
sense, Free Basics may provide participating zero-rated ser-
vices an advantage over those that do not participate. Under-
standing the implications of this on net neutrality is impor-
tant, but also outside the scope of this work.
Future work: Scaling our study We are currently working
towards scaling our QoS measurements of Free Basics along
different dimensions: (i) number of countries: we will re-
cruit volunteers to measure the QoS of Free Basics deploy-
7Facebook advertises the fact that nearly 50% of Free Basics
users convert to paid Internet users within the ﬁrst month of
Internet use as an incentive for network carriers to offer Free
Basics.

132ments in more countries, (ii) number of locations in each
country: we are implementing an Android (mobile) app to
conduct measurements in the background, so our volunteers
can easily measure at various locations using only a phone,
(iii) across time: Free Basics deployments are still in their
infancy. We plan to monitor how the set of accessible web
services changes over the period of several months in sev-
eral countries, and (iv) across cellular technologies: in this
paper, we used high-end phones featuring the latest cellu-
lar technologies like LTE. A recent study [12] indicates that
the majority of phones in developing countries are feature
phones, supporting only older cellular technologies (3G, 2G,
and GSM). This motivates the need to characterize perfor-
mance for other cellular technologies and older devices.
Future work: Need for studies of Free Basics users The
scope of this paper is limited to characterizing available Free
Basics services and the performance for accessing them. Eval-
uating user satisfaction with Free Basics service choices,
their free access to those services, and the quality of net-
work performance they are given to access them, requires
focused ﬁeld studies. Such studies are orthogonal and com-
plementary to our focus. In particular, we hope that recent
efforts towards understanding the usage of zero-rated ser-
vices (where network service providers carry trafﬁc for spe-
ciﬁc Internet services for free and charge for others) would
be extended to cover Free Basics users as well [15].
5. REFERENCES
[1] internet.org by facebook. https://info.internet.org/en/.
[2] Where we’ve launched - internet.org. https:

//info.internet.org/en/story/where-weve-launched/.
[3] Internet users by country (2016) - internet live stats.

http://www.internetlivestats.com/
internet-users-by-country/.

[4] World databank. http://databank.worldbank.org/data/.
[5] Digital divide.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_divide.

[6] An open platform for developing, deploying, and

accessing planetary-scale services.
https://www.planet-lab.org/.

[7] Mlab. https://www.measurementlab.net/.
[8] Facebook’s free basics service has been banned in

india. http://www.theverge.com/2016/2/8/10913398/
free-basics-india-regulator-ruling.

[9] Prohibition of discriminatory tariffs for data services

regulations, 2016.
http://www.trai.gov.in/WriteReadData/WhatsNew/
Documents/Regulation_Data_Service.pdf.

[10] Technical guidelines - free basics.

https://developers.facebook.com/docs/internet-org/
platform-technical-guidelines.

[11] How to submit - free basics. https://developers.
facebook.com/docs/internet-org/how-to-submit.

[12] Sohaib Ahmad, Abdul Lateef Haamid, Zhenyu Zhou,

Zafar Ayyub Qazi, Theophilus Benson, and
Ihsan Ayyub Qazi. A view from the other side:
Understanding mobile phone characteristics in the
developing world. In ACM Internet Measurement
Conference, (IMC), 2016.

[13] Free basics by facebook - android apps on google play.

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.
internet&hl=en.

[14] Xing Xu, Yurong Jiang, Tobias Flach1, Ethan

Katz-Bassett, David Choffnes, and Ramesh Govindan.
Investigating transparent web proxies in cellular
networks. In Passive and Active Measurement
Conference (PAM), 2015.

[15] A. Chen, N. Feamster, and E. Calandro. Exploring the

walled garden theory: An empirical framework to
assess pricing effects on mobile data usage. In
Communications Policy Research South (CPRSouth),
2016.

133