New Kid on the Block:

Exploring the Google+ Social Graph

Gabriel Magno

UFMG

Belo Horizonte, Brazil

magno@dcc.ufmg.br

Giovanni Comarela

UFMG

Belo Horizonte, Brazil

giovannicomarela@dcc.ufmg.br

Diego Saez-Trumper
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Barcelona, Spain

diego.saez@upf.edu

Meeyoung Cha

KAIST

Republic of Korea

meeyoungcha@kaist.edu

Virgilio Almeida

UFMG

Belo Horizonte, Brazil
virgilio@dcc.ufmg.br

ABSTRACT
This paper presents a detailed analysis of the Google+ social net-
work. We identify the key differences and similarities with other
popular networks like Facebook and Twitter, in order to determine
whether Google+ is a new paradigm or yet another social network.
This work is based on large-scale crawls of over 27 million user
proﬁles that represented nearly 50% of the entire network in 2011.
We observe that the average path length between users is slightly
higher than other networks, possibly because Google+ is a new sys-
tem where relationships are still rapidly growing. Google+ shows
a higher level of reciprocity than Twitter, which also has directed
social links. The newly available “places lived” ﬁeld could be used
to study how users are distributed around the world and how ag-
gressively the service has been adopted in different countries. We
ﬁnd that Google+ is popular in countries with relatively low Inter-
net penetration rate. Based on the amount and types of information
publicly shared in user proﬁles, we also ﬁnd that the notion of pri-
vacy varies signiﬁcantly across different cultures.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 [Computer Applications]: Social and behavioral sciencesMis-
cellaneous; H.3.5 [Online Information Services]: Web-based ser-
vices

General Terms
Human Factors, Measurement

Keywords
Google+, Online Social Network, Geo-location

INTRODUCTION

1.
Social networks are a global information infrastructure, where in-
dividuals bring their social relations online and share information,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
IMC’12, November 14–16, 2012, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1705-4/12/11 ...$15.00.

photos, songs, videos, as well as ideas. Social networking sites like
Facebook now reach 82% of the world’s Internet-using population
or about 1.2 billion people in total according to comScore [11].
In fact social networking became the most popular online activ-
ity worldwide. Accordingly, a number of researchers have tried to
understand user behaviors and characteristics of various online so-
cial networks, where Twitter and Facebook have been the two most
popularly examined platforms [26, 7, 39, 3].

To compete in this ﬁeld, Google has launched in June
2011 its own social networking service
called Google+
(https://plus.google.com/). The platform was announced as a
new generation of social network and included several new
features, such as circles that allow users to share different content
with different people and hangouts that let users to create video
chatting session and invite up to nine people from their circles of
friends to share the environment [22].

Since its launch, the Google+ social network has been adding
new users at a rapid pace. In fact, it is known as the fastest growing
network ever, reaching 20 million visitors in only 21 days [10]. The
service has later reached 62 million registered users as of December
2011 [24] and a total of 250 million registered users of whom 150
million are active as of June 2012 [15].

Once Google+ has become a popular social media network, it is
important to understand how it compares to other social network
models. Typical questions follow. How are people connected on
Google+? Who are the most popular users? How are users dis-
tributed worldwide? What is the impact of geography on the social
relationships?

Furthermore, the rapid adoption rate of the service raises inter-
esting questions about online privacy. One crucial question is on
what the default privacy settings should be. Along these lines, it
is worth examining how “closed” social networking sites are, com-
pared to the “open” Internet. Google has positioned itself as pro-
moter of the Internet openness against other social networking ser-
vices that are often described “walled garden" [5] due to limited
access to their internal web pages. Then, is Google+ different?
How open is it and how does it impact user interactions?

To answer

these questions we have crawled more than
27,556,390 user proﬁles and 575,141,097 relationship links among
users, as well as any publicly available data about the users such
as gender, geo-location, and relationship status. A relatively large
number of users leave personal information publicly available for
anyone to see. This kind of information allows us to analyze user
behavior patterns and compare them to previous research results
obtained for other social networks, e.g., Facebook and Twitter.

159Based on the gathered data, we characterize the novel social net-
work model provided by Google+ in depth, its user base, its ge-
ographical distribution, and compare its main characteristics with
other social network services. Among various ﬁndings, some of the
main results are summarized as follows:

1. Our analysis on the top users based on the circles list indicate
that the majority of the top users (7 out of 20) are well-known
individuals from information technology industry;

2. By looking into users who share their work or home con-
tact information publicly (1% of all suers), we observe that a
large fraction of the users who share telephone numbers are
male and single;

3. We ﬁnd that users share strikingly different amounts of infor-
mation to public in their proﬁles depending the country they
live in;

4. By examining the social links between the users in relation
to their countries, we observe that physical distance is crucial
in the likelihood of forming a social link between two users;

5. The fraction of global and national links also vary according
the countries, indicating the different patterns of usages of
the Google+ service across different cultures.

As another contribution of this paper, we make the collected data
available to the wider research community at http://gplus.
camps.dcc.ufmg.br. Our Google+ data set could facilitate
new projects in social computing and computer network research
that need actual data for their experiments.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We begin with a
detailed description of the Google+ platform and the data collection
methodology in Section 2. In Section 3, we study the social graph
of the Google+ users and describe in detail the public attributes
available in Google+. Next, we analyze the impact of geographical
distance and relationships in Google+ in Section 4. We examine the
economic indicators of a country and their relationship to the adop-
tion rate of Google+ within that country. We discuss related work
and implications in Section 5 and Section 6. Finally, we summarize
our ﬁndings and conclude in Section 7.

2. METHODOLOGY
We brieﬂy describe key features of the Google+ service and the
way we gathered data.
2.1 Platform Description
The Google+ service was released in June of 2011 [22]. In the ﬁrst
90 days, the service has been on ﬁeld trial and only those users who
received an invitation could create an account. During this time,
the network grew virally through social contacts.
In September
20th, 2011, the service became publicly open and no invitation was
required for a sign up [21]. These two different mechanisms of
spreading would have attracted different kinds of users to Google+.
For instance, users who joined through invitations are likely tech-
savvy users who typically adopt new services early, compared to
the users who join through open sign-up.

In Google+, users can manage their contact list through circles.
Circles are labeled groups of friends, which allows a user to share
or receive information with and from a speciﬁed subset of his con-
tacts. For example, a user may manage “family”, “colleagues”, and
“alumni” circles. When a user adds someone in one of his circles,
he starts to receive updates from that person. This manual grouping
of contacts alleviates some of the privacy problems that existed in

other “ﬂat” social networks, where default privacy settings are set
to maximize the visibility of users proﬁle and only a small number
of members change it [20]. There are two types of circles, namely
in- and out-circles. While the latter represents the list of users that
a given user has added to her circles, the former represents the list
of other users who added that user to their circles.

Circle names and their user lists are private information that only
the circle creator can see. A user can identify all the others who in-
cluded the user in their circles (i.e., followers), because the user
receives a notiﬁcation when someone adds him to a circle. Similar
to Twitter, people can add other users to their circles without con-
ﬁrmation. This is different from networks like Facebook, where all
social links are reciprocal and both sides of the users should agree
to own a social link. In the user proﬁle page two lists are shown
by default: The “Have user in circles” list, like a followers list, and
“In user’s circles”, similar to the followees list in Twitter. The user
has the option to set these lists as private.

Figure 1: Google+ home page of Larry Page.

Google+ users can publish ideas (status), images, videos and any
kind of URL. Whenever a user post something, she has the option
to set the visibility of that content, choosing which of her circles
can see it. On the other side, a user can choose from which circles
she will receive content. Therefore, circles are the way to man-
age information ﬂow in Google+. The continued information ﬂow
through circles is referred to as “stream” in the system.

There are several features that allow users to interact with others.
User interactions are centered around content; users can comment,
share (like retweet in Twitter), and click on the “+1” button (similar
to Like button in Facebook) on a given content. When a user clicks
on the “+1” button, she is publicly recommending that particular
content to others and it will be saved in her “+1’s tab” similar to
bookmark. There are other features such as photo albums (that
allow users to upload, share and organize photos), hangout (a kind
of collaborative video chat with friends), and games.
2.2 Data Collection
In order to collect user proﬁles in Google+, we implemented a
breadth-ﬁrst search (BFS) crawler in Python, considering both the
public in-circles and out-circles lists (i.e. bidirectional BFS). We
began our crawl with Mark Zuckerberg, the co-creator and chief
executive of Facebook, because he was known to be one of the
most popular users in Google+ at the time of data collection. Given
that users are connected in social networks, our crawler although
started from a single seed node soon reached other popular users
in Google+. We could not repeat the crawl with randomly chosen
seed nodes, because numeric user IDs were not supported at the
time of data collection. Although the BFS technique is simple and
efﬁcient, it exhibits several well-known limitations such as the bias
towards sampling high degree nodes, which may affect the degree
distribution [18, 35].

160The data collection process started on November 11th, 2011, and
ended on December 27th, 2011. We used a total of 11 machines
with different IP addresses to efﬁciently gather large amount of
data. The proﬁle information was retrieved by making HTTP re-
quests to publicly available user proﬁle pages. In total we crawled
27,556,390 proﬁle pages, collecting public user information and its
circles lists. With the social links of the users we have constructed
a directed graph that has 35,114,957 nodes and 575,141,097 edges.
As of the data collection date, we estimated that our data set repre-
sented 56% of all registered Google+ users[2].

There is a limit on the maximum number of users that could ap-
pear in any public circle, which is 10,000 users. Since the Google+
social graph was gathered in both directions (in-circles and out-
circles), we were able to recover almost all “lost edges.” In order to
estimate the fraction of missed links, we compared the number of
users shown in their proﬁle page with the actual number of edges
we collected.
In our dataset there are 915 users with more than
10,000 in-circles users, which should have 37,185,272 incoming
edges according to their proﬁle pages, while we found 27,600,503
links for those users in our graph. By dividing the difference of
these numbers by the total number of edges, we estimate that 1.6%
of the edges are lost because of the 10,000 limit on the circle list.

3. GRAPH ANALYSIS
In order to characterize social relationships of Google+ users, we
deﬁne a social graph. The vertices of the social graph are Google+
users present in our dataset. A user v added by user u to her circles
results in a directed edge from u to v. Therefore the social relations
among Google+ users make a directed graph G(V, E), where V
represents the set of users and E is the set of directed edges (u, v),
u, v ∈ V . Given the social graph construction, we analyze two
types of properties: ﬁrst on the node characteristics and then on the
graph structure. The former capture the characteristics of Google+
users, as deﬁned by the ﬁelds of the user proﬁle, while the latter
represents relationships between users.

Table 1: Top 20 users ranked by in-degree

3.1 Node Characteristics
To get a sense for what users expect from the Google+ service, we
ﬁrst examine who the most popular users are. Table 1 shows the
top 20 users based on their in-degrees (i.e., how many circles these
users are added to by others). The top list of Google+ is a mix of
singers, bloggers, actors, and IT professionals. When we compare
the list to that of Twitter in [26], only one user appears in both lists;
singer Britney Spears ranked second as of mid 2009. The top list is
particularly different from that of Twitter in that (1) we do not see
any news media outlet like the New York Times and CNN, while
(2) we see founders of large Internet-based companies like Google
and Facebook. In fact 7 out of the 20 users are IT related, which is
uncommon in other social networks.

Next focusing more on the average user, we examine what kinds
of interactions they perform on the network. In general, users of so-
cial networking sites reveal different types of personal information
in their proﬁle, such as basic descriptors (e.g., gender, relationship
status, cities lived), contact information (e.g., e-mail, phone num-
ber, address, Web site), personal interests (e.g., favorite TV shows,
movies, books, quotes, music), education information (e.g. ﬁeld of
study, degree), work information (e.g., employer, position), etc.

Google+ users also publish information about themselves in their
proﬁles. Some pieces of information are in “restricted ﬁelds”,
where users have to choose among some options, while in “open
ﬁelds” users can write anything they want. Only the ﬁelds “rela-
tionship”, “looking for”, and gender are restricted ﬁelds. The rest
of the ﬁelds are open ﬁelds. In the ﬁeld called, places lived, a user
can write the name of any place she lived and the Google+ system
automatically tries to mark the place on the map.

For all the ﬁelds, except for the name that is public by default, a
user can control the privacy setting and set visibility of that ﬁeld.
There are ﬁve options: (1) public, which means open to anyone in
the Internet, (2) extend circles, which means open to people that are
in circles and people that are in the circles of those, (3) your circles,
which means open to people in one’s circles, (4) only you, and (5)
custom, which means a user can choose exactly which circles may
view that ﬁeld.

We have collected information about all the ﬁelds of users that
were publicly accessible.
In Table 2, we show the number and
fraction of users that have made each type of information available.

Rank Name

Paris Hilton

1 Larry Page
2 Mark Zuckerberg
3 Britney Spears
Snoop Dogg
4
5
Sergey Brin
6 Tyra Banks
7 Vic Gundotra
8
9 Richard Branson
10 Dane Cook
11
Jessi June
12 Trey Ratcliff
13 will.i.am
14
15 Thomas Hawk
16 Tom Anderson
17
Pete Cashmore
18 Guy Kawasaki
19 Wil Wheaton
20 Ron Garan

Felicia Day

About
IT (Google)
IT (Facebook)
Musician
Musician
IT (Google)
Model
IT (Google)
Socialite
Businessman (Virgin Group)
Comedian
Model
Blogger
Musician
Actor
Blogger
IT (Myspace)
IT (Mashable)
IT (Apple) & Writer
Actor & Writer
Astronaut (NASA)

Table 2: Public attributes available in Google+

Attribute
Name
Gender
Education
Places lived
Employment
Phrase
Other proﬁles
Occupation
Contributor to
Introduction
Other names
Relationship
Braggin rights
Recommended links
Looking for
Work (contact)
Home (contact)

Available
27,556,390
26,914,758
7,471,191
7,371,461
5,917,609
4,075,132
3,713,546
3,656,447
3,622,627
2,149,191
1,210,760
1,186,903
1,074,964
1,001,349
753,704
60,434
58,876

%

100.00
97.67
27.11
26.75
21.47
14.79
13.48
13.27
13.15
7.80
4.39
4.31
3.90
3.63
2.74
0.22
0.21

1613.2 Privacy concerns
Studies on human behavior [38] show that individuals with proﬁles
on social networking sites may have greater risk taking attitudes
than those who do not. And sharing contact information, such tele-
phone numbers, may increases risks. As far as contact details are
concerned, the work in [38] shows how many Facebook users dis-
close identity information in the form of contact details. The ma-
jority of the users in the sample used by the study publicly showed
their e-mail address (64.1%). Only a few Facebook members pub-
lished their mobile phone number (10.7%). Similarly, only a mi-
nority (10.7%) of the participants revealed their home address on
Facebook.

Google+ allows their users to publish contact information in their
proﬁles. Some users publicly share their work or home contact
information. In our data set, a total of 72,736 users share telephone
number in Google+, which represent 0.26% of the population. We
call these users tel-users and because they represent a class of risk
taking users we look into the details of the proﬁle of these users.

In order to examine how much information tel-users share pub-
licly compared to all users, we show the CCDF (Complementary
Cumulative Distribution Function) of the number of ﬁelds in the
proﬁle shared for each user in Figure 2, removing the ﬁelds of
Home and Work information from the contabilization.
(The list
of the ﬁelds available are given in Table 2.) As we can see, tel-
users generally share more information in their proﬁles than other
Google+ users, which conﬁrm their risk taking attitude. For ex-
ample, 10% of all Google+ users share more than six ﬁelds, while
66% of the tel-users do the same.

Figure 2: Number of ﬁelds shared by users in the proﬁle

Concerning the information sharing behavior of Google+ users,
table 3 displays the percentage of users who give information about
gender, relationship, and location for all users and tel-users, consid-
ering only those users that had the ﬁeld public. Among all users of
the dataset, 68% are male and 31% are female. However, the differ-
ence is much higher when we consider tel-users; 86% are male and
11% female, indicating that female Google+ users are less likely
to share phone numbers than male Google+ users. Similar to the
observations conﬁrmed in [16], more risk taking behaviors can be
found for men and greater concern from women with regard to in-
formation provided on the Web.

What is particular about Google+ is that it asks users to provide
a very detailed level of information about their relationship status
as opposed to other social networks. The nine default options from
which users can choose from are listed in the table. Conducting the
same comparison of all users and tel-users over the relationship sta-
tus, we ﬁnd that user behaviors are similar between the two groups.

Total
Gender (N)

Male
Female
Other

Location (N)

Relationship (N)

Table 3: Information shared by all users and tel-users
All users Tel-users
72,736
71,267
85.99%
11.26%
2.75%
29,068
57.24%
21.03%
10.23%
3.98%
2.98%
2.77%
0.58%
0.77%
0.41%
45,676
8.92%
31.90%
4.72%
2.19%
1.52%
50.77%

27,556,390
26,914,758
67.65%
31.46%
0.89%
1,186,903
42.82%
26.59%
19.80%
3.16%
4.39%
1.26%
0.50%
1.08%
0.39%
6,621,644
31.38%
16.71%
5.76%
3.35%
2.30%
40.50%

Single
Married
In a relationship
It’s complicated
Engaged
In an open relationship
Widowed
In a domestic partnership
In a civil union

United States
India
Brazil
United Kingdom
Canada
Other

However, those users who set their relationship status as “single”,
“it’s complicated”, “in an open relationship”, “widowed”, and “in a
civil union” were more likely to share their phone numbers publicly
than others. In particular, we saw a high percentage of single users
(57.24%) compared to all the users (42.82%). In contrast, only half
of the users “in a relationship” shared their phone numbers.

The fraction of tel-users does not follow the rank of the top 10
countries in Figure 6. While the US take up 31.38% of all users, it
counts for only 8.92% of those users who have made their phone
numbers available in Google+. In contrast, India now becomes the
most populated country based on the fraction of tel-users count
(31.90%). The fraction of Indian users in the tel-users group is
twice as big as in all other country users group.

While the different level at which users of a given country reveal
their phone numbers is interesting, this may come as no surprise
when we account for the fact that people’s perception of what is
“private” is different. According to a report in [9], 65% of people
in Germany ﬁnd mobile phone number as personal, whereas only
28% of people in Romania think the same.

3.3 Structural characteristics
We next present characteristics of the Google+ social graph. For
each network metric, we also show the results for the Twitter graph
from other research [7] for comparison.

3.3.1 Degree Distribution
One of the most common structural measures analyzed in complex
networks such as the Google+ social graph is the distribution of the
number of the incoming and outgoing node connections or what is
so called “degree.” Figure 3 shows the CCDF for the variables out-
degree and in-degree of the Google+ social graph. We can see that
these curves have approximately the shape of a Power Law distri-
bution. The CCDF of a Power Law distribution is given by Cx−α,
x, α, C > 0. If we compare the curves with Twitter, we observe
similar patterns, altough Google+ shows slightly lower degrees.

 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16CCDF# fields available in profileTelephone usersAll users162By using a simple statistical linear regression (in the log-log
scale) we estimated the exponent α that best models the data. We
obtained α = 1.3 (with R2 = 0.99) for in-degree and α = 1.2
(with R2 = 0.99) for out-degree. Although both curves are simi-
lar, the out-degree curve drops sharply around 5000. We conjecture
this is because Google maintains a policy that allows only some
special users to outpass a speciﬁed threshold (unknown) and add
more than 5000 friends to their circles.

Figure 3: Degree Distributions

The overall power-law trend shown in the degree distribution is
characteristics of the human social networks. This means that a
small fraction of the individuals have disproportionately large num-
ber of neighbors, while most users have a small number of neigh-
bors. Examples of such hubs are listed in Table 1. For instance,
Larry Page is listed in 3.7 million circles as of August 2012, while
the majority are listed in no more than 10 circles. As studied in
many other research, hubs play a central role in information propa-
gation in social networks.
3.3.2 Reciprocity
In order to evaluate discrepancies between in- and out-degrees for
a given node we use a simple metric called Relation Reciprocity
(RR) of a node u ∈ V as:

RR(u) =

|OS(u) ∩ IS(u)|

|OS(u)|

(1)

where OS(u) is the set of nodes (i.e, users) that have an incoming
edge from u and IS(u) is the set of nodes with outgoing edges
pointing to u.

Figure 4(a) shows the distribution of the Relation Reciprocity.
This metric is able to effectively differentiate very popular users,
such as celebrities and companies, with very low reciprocity from
ordinary users, that have moderate to high RR.

The analysis of the relation reciprocity in circles links suggests
a strong signature of the Google+ users. More than 60% of the
users have RR higher than 0.6, which shows some sort of structural
balance between the users of this new social networking service.
This concept is related to the fraction of reciprocal relationships in
a social graph. Based on our datasets, we calculate the percentage
of global reciprocal relations and ﬁnd 32% in Google+, compared
to 22.1% reported for Twitter [26].

The high reciprocity rate in Google+ may be related to the
scarcity of large media outlet proﬁles, since by the time of our col-
lection the “pages” feature was new and not very popular. Media

outlet attract very large numbers of followers, but do not exhibit
followees. Different kinds of online sharing services exhibit higher
reciprocal relations, such as 68% for Flickr [8] and 84% for Yahoo!
360 [25].

3.3.3 Clustering Coefﬁcient
Another common characteristic of social networks is a high average
clustering coefﬁcient (CC). The CC of a node u, denoted by C(u),
is deﬁned as the probability of any two of its neighbors (outgoing)
being neighbors themselves [41]. This metric is associated to the
number of triangles that contain a node u. For a directed graph, the
maximum number of triangles connecting the |OS(u)| outgoing
neighbors of u is |OS(u)|(|OS(u)| − 1). Thus, the CC measures
the ratio between actual triangles and their maximal value. Dur-
ing clustering coefﬁcient analysis we only consider the nodes with
|OS(u)| > 1, since this is a necessary condition for this computa-
tion.

Figure 4(b) shows the distribution for the CC of nodes in the so-
cial graph. We randomly sampled one million nodes and computed
CC for each one of them. We can see that 40% of all users have
a CC greater than 0.2. An approximate calculation, based on the
results presented for Facebook in [39], allows us to estimate the
clustering coefﬁcient for part of Facebook population. In [39], we
have that only users with degree smaller than 50 have an average
CC greater than this value. However, these users represent less than
1% of the entire network [39], suggesting that Google+ has a higher
average cluster coefﬁcient than Facebook, which represent a more
tightly connected network. Comparing with Twitter (as shown in
Figure 4(b)), we can also see higher values of CC in Google+.

Strongly Connected Component

3.3.4
The study of the connected components of a social graph is a key
factor to understand its structural properties. For example, if we
know the WCCs (Weakly Connected Components) of a graph then
we have information about the number of isolated nodes in the net-
work as well if it has a giant component. Due to the data collection
procedure used to crawl Google+ in this work, which is a bidirec-
tional snow ball, the social graph G consists of only one WCC. As a
consequence, we do not have information about the isolated nodes,
but we know that we have collected a giant component of the graph
(see Table 4).

In order to investigate the connectivity of G we decided to mea-
sure the number and size of all its Strongly Connected Compo-
nents (SCC). A strongly connected component of a social graph
(directed) is a subgraph, such that a node can be reached from any
other node following edges between them. SCCs have an impor-
tant role in directed social networks (like Google+) because they
are central to information dissemination to the users that are part of
the them. Graphs with large SCCs are amenable to quick informa-
tion dissemination processes.

We identiﬁed 9,771,696 SCCs in G. To reach this number we
used a procedure involving two Depth First Searches [12]. Figure
4(c) presents the CCDF of the size of all SCCs found in G.
In
this ﬁgure we can see that almost all of them are small. In fact,
there is only one with more than 100 nodes, which is the SCC with
25,240,000, that means that G has a giant component and the graph
we collected is highly connected.

3.3.5 Degrees of Separation
The degree of separation essentially describes the shortest possible
routes between two nodes of our graph. Although the degree of
separation has been commonly thought of in the social context, the
concept has many applications in social networking such as infor-

DegreeCCDFTwitter InTwitter OutGoogle+ InGoogle+ Out10010110210310410510610710−810−610−410−2100163(a) Reciprocal links

(b) Clustering coefﬁcients of nodes

(c) Size of the strongly connected components

Figure 4: Distributions of various network properties in Google+

Table 4: Comparison of topological characteristics of Google+ and other online social networks

Network
Google+
Facebook
Twitter
Orkut

Nodes
35M 575M
721M 62G
41.7M 106M
223M

3M

Edges % Crawled

Path length Reciprocity Diameter

In-degree Out-degree

56%
100%
100%
11%

5.9
4.7
4.1
4.3

32%
100%
22%
100%

19
41
18
9

16.4
190.2
28.19

-

16.4
190.2
29.34

-

mation dissemination and friend recommendation [13]. We present
an analysis of how many hops there are between two users in the
Google+ social graph. In order to have the exact distribution we
would need to compute the shortest path from all nodes to all nodes
of the network. Due to the computational cost of this task we de-
cided to use a random sampling procedure [1]. We sampled k dif-
ferent users and for each one of them we computed the shortest path
to all others users in the network. We started with k = 2000 and
increased its until 10000, stopping in this value once there were no
more changes in the distribution.

Figure 5 presents the ﬁnal estimate of the path length distribution
for two cases: the directed graph G and its undirected version. In
the ﬁrst case we can see that the most common value is 6 with an
average of 5.9. In the second we have 5 as the most common and
an average of 4.7. The graph G has a diameter of 19 and for its
undirected version 13. This means that most users are only a few
hops away from a random user, which has the important implica-

tion that information can spread quickly and widely throughout the
network.

Although we have found the same mode of the well-known study
of Milgram [31], it is important to remark that we are analyzing the
public graph of Google+. So, adding back the edges omitted by
users due to privacy constraints may reduce the average path length
further. Comparing with other networks, we refer to Twitter with a
mode of 4 and average of 4.12 [26], Facebook with an average of
4.74 hops [3] and a median of 6 for the MSN messenger network
[27].

Table 4 summarizes the key structural features of Google+ and
three others important OSNs in order to conclude this section.
Statistics on other social networks are borrowed from [26, 3, 39,
32]. We can see some important differences, for example the
Google+ social graph has a higher average path length and reci-
procity.
Its diameter is comparable to Twitter, but smaller than
Facebook. Moreover, we can see that the number of friends (both
in- and out-degrees) are much smaller when compared to Facebook.

4. PATTERNS ACROSS GEO-LOCATIONS
Google+ users can list all the places they have lived at a ﬁeld in their
proﬁle called “Places lived,” which is incorporated to the Google
Map for visualization. Nearly 27% of the users in our dataset pro-
vide geo-location information. This feature is unique in Google+,
for other social networks like Facebook only allows users to list
their current location and, at most, their hometown information.

Using the places lived ﬁeld, we analyzed how Google+ users
are distributed around the world. For this, we ﬁrst extracted the
coordinates of the last location from the places lived ﬁeld for each
user and translated the coordinates into a valid country identiﬁer.
In this fashion, we were able to identify the country of 6,621,644
users.

Figure 5: Estimated path length distribution

0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0ReciprocityCDFTwitterGoogle+0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0Clustering CoefficientCDFTwitterGoogle+Component SizeCCDFTwitterGoogle+10010110210310410510610710810−710−610−510−410−310−2HopsProbability0.00.10.20.30.415101520DirectedUndirected164(a) GDP Per Capita and Use of Google+

(b) GDP Per Capita and Internet Penetration

Figure 7: Usage of Internet and Google+ among countries

Note that our measure is meaningful only for the relative ranking
of different countries, because our data is a sample taken from
Google+ and in the sample only 27% of the users provide geo-
location information.

Figure 7(a) shows the Google+ penetration rate for the top 20
countries. The top country in Google+ adoption now becomes In-
dia. We also see that countries like Taiwan and Thailand appear
in the top ten list. For comparison, we show the Internet penetra-
tion rate of the same top 20 countries in Figure 7(b). The top ﬁve
countries of Internet penetration are United Kingdom, Germany,
Canada, Japan, and Australia. Both of the ﬁgures have Gross Do-
mestic Product (GDP) per capita in the X-axis.

We make several observations. First, while there is a linear re-
lationship between the GDP per capita of a country and its Inter-
net penetration rate (identiﬁed as the data points clustered near
a straight line in Figure 7(b)), we do not see the same trend in
Google+ penetration rate. Countries with lower GDP per capita
like Brazil, Mexico, and Thailand have equal footing in the pene-
tration rate as with much wealthier countries such as United King-
dom, Australia, and Canada.

Second, certain countries showed a large gap between the Inter-
net and Google+ penetration rate such as Japan, Russia, and China.
In both of these countries, domestic social networks like Mixi in
Japan, Odnoklassniki in Russia, and QQ in China are widely used.
International social networking services like Facebook and Twitter
are known to have little presence in these countries. Also in case
of China, international social networking sites have been blocked
[17].

Third, countries with lower Internet penetration like India and
Brazil had a very high Google+ penetration rate. As we mentioned
before, these two countries are known to favor Google’s other so-
cial network, Orkut. It is possible that users in India and Brazil are
familiar with the Google product, hence are more likely to adopt
the service quickly than other countries.
4.2 User Occupation
Among various statistics we examined, the occupation-job title of
the top users clearly distinguished Google+ from other well-known
social networks, as we examined in Table 2. Interestingly, the top
occupations also varied slightly across different countries. Table 5
shows the occupation-job title of the 10 most connected users in
each of the top 10 countries, based on their in-degree (i.e., how
many circles these users are added to by others). At a glance, the
top list of Google+ is a mix of singers, bloggers, actors, and IT (i.e.,

Figure 6: Top 10 countries with Google+ users

Figure 6 shows the top 10 countries in our dataset with their re-
spective percentages of the registered users.1 More than 30% of
the users who share their location information are identiﬁed as liv-
ing in the US. We observe Google+ is relatively popular in India
and Brazil, which are also two of the countries with high presence
of Google’s other social network, Orkut [19]. United Kingdom,
Canada, and Germany also appear in the list, which are countries
known to have high Internet Penetration Rate (IPR) or the percent-
age of Internet users out of the population of that country.2
In-
terestingly, countries like Indonesia and Mexico appear in our top
list, which are not part of the top countries based on the Internet
penetration rate.
4.1 Economics
Intrigued by the unique mix of countries based on Internet penetra-
tion rate, we further investigate which countries have high percent-
age of their Internet population on Google+. To do that we deﬁne
Google+ Penetration Rate, that can be computed for each country
C as follows:

GP R =

number of users in our dataset living in C

Internet population of C

.

(2)

1County codes represent the following. US: United States; IN: In-
dia; BR: Brazil; GB: United Kingdom; CA: Canada; DE: Germany;
ID: Indonesia; MX: Mexico; IT: Italy; ES: Spain.
2Statistics about the Internet penetration rate and population were
obtained from http://www.internetworldstats.com

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,000Relative use of Google+ (% of internet users)GDP per capita (PPP)EuropeRUITFRGBDEESAsiaVNINIDCNTHJPTWLatin AmericaBRMXARNorth AmericaCAUSOceaniaAUMiddle EastIR 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,000Internet penetration (% of population)GDP per capita (PPP)EuropeRUITESFRGBDEAsiaVNINIDCNTHJPTWLatin AmericaBRMXARNorth AmericaCAUSOceaniaAUMiddle EastIR0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30USINBRGBCADEIDMXITESFractionCountry165United Kingdom Bu Mu

IT

Co Mu
So
Mu
Co
TV Jo Wr Ar

Table 5: Occupation-Job Title of the top users
Profession codes of the top-10 users∗
IT Mu
IT Mu Mo Mo
Bl
IT Mu Mu
Bu Ac
IT
Bl
IT
IT Mu Ec
So Mo Mo

IT Mo Ac
IT Mu Bu
Bu
IT Mu
IT
Co Mu Co
Bl
IT Mo
IT
IT Mu Co Ac
Jo
Ec Mu Bl
Jo
Jo
IT
IT

Ph
Bl Mu Ac
Jo Mu Mu
IT Mu
Po

IT Mu Co
IT
Jo
IT

IT
Bl
Mu
Mu Mu Mu
IT
Jo
Jo
Po

Jo
Po

IT Mu Bl
IT
IT
IT Mu Mu

Jo

So

Jaccard

1.00
0.57
0.18
0.57
0.83
0.22
0.30
0.33
0.29
0.25

Country

United States

India
Brazil

Canada
Germany
Indonesia
Mexico

Italy
Spain

* Co: Comedian; Mu: Musician; IT: Information Technology Person; Bu: Businessman; Mo: Model;
Ac: Actor; So: Socialite; TV: Television Host; Jo: Journalist; Bl: Blogger; Ec: Economist; Ar: Artist;
Po: Politician; Ph: Photographer; Wr: Writer

Information Technology) professionals. When we compare the list
to that of Twitter [26], the top list is particularly different in that
we do not see any news media outlet like the New York Times and
CNN, while we see founders of large Internet-based companies like
Google and Facebook. In fact, seven out of the top 20 global users
were IT related in Google+, which is uncommon in other social
networks.

In the table, we also show the Jaccard index, used to compare the
similarity and diversity of occupations in these country when com-
pared to occupation-job titles in US. The top users in Canada have
a very similar proﬁle to that of the United States. Furthermore, the
US, Canada, UK, and India share several top professions, which we
may be due to the common British colonization. In contrast, Brazil,
Italy, and Spain show a different set of celebrities and professions,
and is worth noting that these three countries are Latin cultures,
different from anglo-saxon cultures (US, CA, GB).

The top countries have very different kinds of popular users. IT
professionals are popular in Google+. In Brazil, there are no fa-
mous IT related public ﬁgures, hence the list is dominated by co-
medians and bloggers. In Mexico, half of the top users are related to
music. Italy is the country with more journalists among top users,
4 in total. Spain is the only country having Politicians in the top 10
user list. These lists suggest that each country has a different pat-
tern of utilization of the information network provided by Google+,
because the occupations of the top individuals represent what a typ-
ical user expect from Google+.
4.3 Openness
We next examine how these 10 countries differ in the notion of pri-
vacy, by looking at the number of different types of information
publicly shared by users in their proﬁles (e.g., name, gender, edu-
cation, occupation). As mentioned earlier, the name ﬁeld is manda-
tory. Also, because of our methodology to utilize geo-location,
all of the sample users studied in this section have shared “places
lived” ﬁeld. Therefore, the minimum number of shared ﬁelds is 2.
Figure 8 shows the CCDF of the number of ﬁelds users of the
top 10 countries shares in their proﬁles. We present the X-axis in
the range 2-14 for better visualization. We observe that, although
the difference between the countries is not very pronounced, the
ranking is slightly different.

Indonesia and Mexico share more information than other more
popular countries like United States and United Kingdom. Ger-
many is the most conservative when it comes to sharing personal
information; it was the only country having less than 10% of the
users sharing more than 12 ﬁelds and also the only country having
less than 30% of the users sharing more than 10 ﬁelds.

Figure 8: Number of ﬁelds in proﬁles in each country

4.4 Average Path Miles
We now investigate the relationship between social network struc-
ture and geographical properties. We start by answering the fol-
lowing question: is the geographical location of users an important
factor in the formation of social links? To understand if the distance
has some inﬂuence on the formation of social links as described in
circles, we estimated the physical distance of pairs of users in three
cases: (1) every pair of socially connected users (approximately 60
million pairs), (2) pairs of reciprocally connected users (approx-
imately 13 million pairs) and (3) randomly chosen pairs of users
(20 million, not linked by a social relation). We then computed the
physical distance between them. It is important to remark that we
conducted this analysis only for users that share geo-location infor-
mation, which represents 26.75% of the crawled Google+ network.
Figure 9(a) shows the cumulative distribution on the expected
physical distance—which we call the path mile, similar to the no-
tion of the path length—between pairs of circle friends and random
user pairs in Google+. The friendship links in Google+ have higher
geographical proximity than a random pairs of users. Nearly 58%
of the users (friends) were separated by less than a thousand miles
and 15% of them were separated by in fact 10 miles. This obser-
vation reinforces the high chance that the Google+ network largely
capture the ofﬂine social relationships among users. As expected,
users with symmetric links (reciprocal) live closer than those with
asymmetrical links, indicating the inﬂuence of physical distance on
the intensity of the relationship.

One natural question that arises from this result is whether it de-
pends, or not, on the country size. For example, do geographically
large countries like US have a higher average path mile than small

 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 2 4 6 8 10 12 14CCDFNumber of fields shared by the userIDMXUSBRGBESCAITINDE166(a) Path Mile distribution of Google+ users

(b) Average path mile with standard deviation

Figure 9: Path Mile distributions

countries like Italy? If this is the case, large countries should have
better investment in content distribution in order to minimize jit-
ter and delay especially for the delivery of user generated videos.
Figure 9(b) shows the average path miles along with the standard
deviation error bar for the top 10 countries. Contrary to our expec-
tation, there is no speciﬁc pattern relating the size of the country
and its average path mile. One possible explanation could be that
small countries have a considerable fraction of edges going outside
the country. In fact, this result is discussed in next section.
4.5 Social links across geography
The ﬁnal question we ask is about the impact of country on friend-
ship link formation. In particular, we ask: are users in the same
country more likely to be friends in Google+ than users in differ-
ent countries? To answer this question, we constructed a graph
of countries, where each node is represented by one of the top 10
countries and the weight of each directed edge is given by the pro-
portion of outgoing links from one country to another. Self-loop
edges hence would represent the fraction of friendship links that
bind two users in the same country.

Figure 10 shows the visualization of the links across the top 10
countries of Google+. The size of each node is normalized to rep-
resent the proportion of Google+ users in the associated country
and the thickness of each edge is proportional to its weight. Edges
with weight smaller than 0.01 were omitted to improve visibility.
With this result we ﬁnd that US has an important role in the overall
landscape of Google+, as seen from the dominant inﬂux of edges
from most countries to the US. Moreover, the US is a node with
low reciprocity, which means that there are a signiﬁcant number
of people of other places adding people in the US to their circles
while those in the US, in general, prefer to form friendships among
themselves.

Highly populated countries like Brazil, India, and Indonesia (and
the US as already mentioned) tend to have a high weight in the
self-loop edges. For the remaining six countries, the proportion
of self-loops is much smaller. In particular, only 30% of the links
are self-loops in United Kingdom and 33% in Canada. These two
countries, as a result, have a large number of out-going edges to
the US, which might be explained by geographical proximity and
cultural similarity (e.g., sharing the same spoken language).

It is also worth noticing that in Figure 10, the countries that ex-
hibit self-loop edges grater than 0.50 are those that do not have
English as their ﬁrst languages, which are Indonesia, India, Brazil,
Italy. Perhaps because of its economical and technological leader-
ship, the US also exhibits a high degree of self-loop edges. This
indicates the language barrier in the set up of cross-national so-
cial relationships. Furthermore, this also means that the nature of
language and geography will introduce interesting opportunity for
growth strategies (e.g., launch of Google+ in a new non-English
speaking country will likely show a similar organic growth pattern
with many national links).

The average path mile discussed earlier could mean that content
distribution in Google+ faces similar challenges for both small and
large countries. In fact, smaller countries like United Kingdom may
require more sophisticated measures to reduce delay in content de-
livery, as seen from its high average path mile. Furthermore, we see
varying patterns of link formation across different countries. When
it comes to building recommender systems, it may make sense to
recommend domestic users and their content for those countries
that have high degree of self-loop such as Brazil and India. How-
ever, it may be of more interest to the users to recommend foreign
users and content to those in Germany and United Kingdom due to
their low fraction of self-loops.
5. RELATED WORK
Characterization of social networks and user behavior is fundamen-
tal to the understanding and engineering of these services on the In-
ternet. Many studies focus on the characterization of the most pop-
ular social network models, such as Facebook, Twitter, Orkut, Cy-
world and others. Some of the important ﬁndings of these studies
include establishing power law distributions for in- and out-degree,
short average distance between pairs of users, a very large con-
nected component, and a small number of extremely popular users.
Thus, in the remainder of this section, we restrict our coverage of
related work to studies that concentrate on characterization of other
social network models.

Mislove et al. [32] studied graph theoretic properties of social
networks, based on the friend network of Orkut, Flickr, LiveJour-
nal, and YouTube. They conﬁrmed the power-law, small-world,
and scale-free properties of these social network services. Ahn et

Distance (Thousand Miles)CDFRandomFriendsReciprocal02468101200.20.40.60.81 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000USINBRGBCADEIDMXITESAverage Path MileCountry167Figure 10: Link distribution across the top countries

al. [1] studied the network properties of Cyworld, a popular social
networking service in South Korea. They compared the explicit
friend relationship network with the implicit network created by
messages exchanged on Cyworld’s guestbook. They found similar-
ities in both networks: the in-degree and out-degree were close to
each other and social interaction through the guestbook was highly
reciprocal.

Recently, Ugander et al.

[39, 3] used the complete Facebook
dataset to study the social graph of Facebook. They show - among
other things - that the degree of separation in that platform is 4.7,
while we ﬁnd that in Google+ it is 5.9. This difference may be ex-
plained by the fact that Google+ is a new platform at it should get
denser in the future, as studied by [28] for different networks. Two
recent references [26, 7] focus on the study of the Twitter graph.
Other studies comparing different social network models were done
by [32, 4]. In general, Google+ presents a combination of the char-
acteristics of other networks, such as Facebook and Twitter.

When it comes to research on geo-location of users in online
social networks, Liben-Nowell et al. [29] analyzed the geograph-
ical location of LiveJournal users and found a strong correlation
between friendship and geographic proximity. This work conﬁrms
that most social links in the blog network are correlated with phys-
ical distance and only 33% of the friendships are independent of
geography. We ﬁnd a similar pattern in the friendship structure
of Google+ in this paper. Recently, Scellato et al. [37] showed
that there is a strong relationship between geographical distance
and the probability of being friends in social networks. They dis-
cuss the implications of geo-location for social networking sites.
Rodrigues et al. [36] investigate the word-of-mouth based content
discovery by analyzing URLs in Twitter. They showed that propa-
gation and physical proximity have correlation. Finally, Poblete et
al. [34] studied a large amount of data gathered from Twitter and
showed the various usages of the system depending across different
countries.

Most existing work focus on several extremely popular social
networks. Although it started much later in time, Google+ has
grown rapidly as one of the top 10 popular social networks in the
world. While there exist a large number of newspaper articles [24,
23, 40, 14] and blog articles [33, 6] on Google+, no research paper

has looked into its structure or user behavior in a research oriented
way. This work provides a ﬁrst look into the social graph and the
geo-location patterns of Google+ users.

IMPLICATIONS

6.
So far, we have made a series of observations about the service,
network topology, and users of the Google+ social network based
on large-scale data. In this section, we discuss the implications of
these ﬁndings.

First, given that Google+ is a new social network, our ﬁrst inter-
est is to compare the topological structure of Google+ against other
social networks. Compared to other social networks, Google+ cher-
ishes openness in content sharing and is not a “walled garden”
service like Facebook, where only the members can access con-
tent [30]. On the other hand, Google+ enforces a strong notion of
friendship links by allowing users to manage different circles of
friends. Our data analyses in Section 3 and Section 4 indicate that
Google+ is in fact truly a social network, where the social links are
correlated in geography reﬂecting ofﬂine friendship (i.e., friends
are more likely to be located close), is far more reciprocal (i.e., bidi-
rectional links), and have higher clustering coefﬁcient (i.e., have
triangle structures) compared to Twitter. The average path length is
shown slightly longer than the other networks. As shown earlier, it
is 5.9 in Google+ compared to 4.1–4.7 in other networks. A possi-
ble reason stem from the Google+ network is new and is still in the
growing phase.

Second, observing the patterns of Google+ penetration world-
wide can give insight into other new social networking service
providers who would like to enter the market. While most new so-
cial network services typically starts their operation as a third party
application or an adds-on service to the existing OSN services,
Google+ is leading a full-ﬂedged competition in the ﬁeld. There-
fore the pattern of how this new service is being adopted is impor-
tant. While popular social networks like Facebook are known to
have extremely high penetration rate of 50% or above [42], there is
still room for a new social network service to become a hit in some
countries. In particular, Google+ have been successfully adopted
by countries with lower GDP per capita and this trend is important

US0.79IN0.02GB0.02CA0.020.120.77BR0.100.780.360.050.300.03DE0.020.380.030.030.330.230.020.030.020.49ID0.140.74MX0.220.030.020.020.46ES0.04IT0.200.020.020.020.560.160.030.020.030.49168because the Internet penetration rate of these countries are growing
fast–meaning the user base could potentially grow more rapidly for
Google+.

Third, our ﬁndings about the privacy concern of users indi-
cate that users exhibit different privacy notions and expectations
in Google+, based on geography. Such differences could be taken
into account when trying to build a recommender system or run an
advertisement campaign on top of Google+, for instance, the sys-
tem could feature newly emerging musicians to users in Mexico,
while recommend journalists to newly joining users in Italy. Also,
running a political campaign on Google+ may not turn out success-
ful for many countries, except for in Spain. Another example would
be that marketers could build appealing proﬁles for companies by
following the right level of privacy concerns in each country.

Third, based on the information about the circle list and the ge-
ography of users, we have examined how the social links are dis-
tributed across different countries. The resulting map in Figure 10
shows an interpreting landscape of user interactions. We ﬁnd very
different user behaviors in this case. Certain countries like Brazil,
India, and Indonesia appear far more inward looking when form-
ing social links, than those outward looking countries like United
Kingdom and Canada. This means that based on the geographical
location of where a user lives, her expectation towards ﬁnding a
stronger local community in the network is different. We believe
this kind of social network analysis allows us to study the collec-
tive and deviant behavior of particular demographics, which are
increasingly considered important and useful both in research and
practice.

7. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper we study characteristics of the Google+ social graph.
We present a comprehensive description of the platform, highlight-
ing the main differences from other popular social network models.
Our study is based on a large amount of data gathered encompass-
ing 27 million user proﬁles and their connections to other users.
With this dataset we analyze unique features of the Google+ demo-
graphics, especially on the gender, occupation, relationship status,
and geo-location of users. We construct a graph representing the so-
cial relations of Google+ and analyze its structural properties, such
as reciprocity, clustering coefﬁcient, and node degree distribution.
The Google+ social graph has a giant connected component that
included 70% of the crawled users, which means that information
can ﬂow freely among all such users.

We also compute the average physical distance between two con-
nected users. Exploiting the geo-location of users, we could see
how aggressively Google+ has been adopted in different countries.
We investigate relationships between economic indexes of coun-
tries and the adoption rate of Google+. We ﬁnd that Google+ is
popular in countries with relatively low Internet penetration rate.
By examining the top users based on the circle link information,
seven out of the top 20 users turned out to be in the information
technology industry, a trend that is rather uncommon in other online
social networks, where popular ﬁgures are media outlets, celebri-
ties, and public ﬁgures. By looking into users who share their con-
tact information publicly, we observe that a large fraction of the
users are male and single.

There are several interesting directions for future research. First,
we are interested in measuring the speed at which a new social
network service grows and whether we can predict the phase tran-
sitions in the growth sparks (e.g., tipping point when a network
suddenly shows a rapid growth or the point where the growth sta-
bilizes and turns into a dormant phase). By collecting multiple
snapshots of the Google+ topology, we hope to gain insight in

the dynamic changes in the internal structure of the social network
over various adoption phases. Second, having seen the key differ-
ences of Google+ from other online social networks, we would like
to understand how different privacy settings and openness impact
the types of conversations and the patterns of content sharing in
Google+. By gathering status updates of the most proliﬁc users,
we hope to understand what people expect to read and share from
Google+ as opposed to other walled-garden or media-like social
networks.

Acknowledgements
We thank our shepherd Zhi-Li Zhang and the anonymous re-
viewers for their valuable comments. This research was partially
funded by the Brazilian National Institute of Science and Technol-
ogy for the Web (MCT/CNPq/INCT grant number 573871/2008-
6). Gabriel Magno, Giovanni Comarela and Virgilio Almeida were
partially supported by grants from CNPq, CAPES and FAPEMIG.
Diego Saez-Trumper was supported by the HIPERGRAPH project
(TIN2009-14560-C03-01) from the Spanish Economy and Com-
petitiveness Ministry. Meeyoung Cha was supported by Basic Sci-
ence Research Program through the National Research Foundation,
Korea (2011-0012988).

8. REFERENCES
[1] Y.-Y. Ahn, S. Han, H. Kwak, S. Moon, and H. Jeong.

Analysis of topological characteristics of huge online social
networking services. In Proc. of ACM International World
Wide Web Conference, pages 835–844, 2007.

[2] P. Allen. Google+ growth accelerating. passes 62 million
users. adding 625,000 new users per day. prediction: 400
million users by end of 2012., December 2011.
http://bit.ly/gp_nusers.

[3] L. Backstrom, P. Boldi, M. Rosa, J. Ugander, and S. Vigna.

Four degrees of separation. CoRR, abs/1111.4570, 2011.

[4] F. Benevenuto, T. Rodrigues, M. Cha, and V. Almeida.

Characterizing user behavior in online social networks. In
Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference,
pages 49–62, 2009.

[5] S. Brin. Web freedom faces greatest threat ever, warns

google’s sergey brin., April 2012. http:
//www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/
apr/15/web-freedom-threat-google-brin.
[6] H. Carpenter. I already use facebook and twitter. why do i

need google+?, July 2011.
http://tinyurl.com/7pwauo2.

[7] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. P. Gummadi.

Measuring User Inﬂuence in Twitter: The Million Follower
Fallacy. In Proc. of AAAI International Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media, 2010.

[8] M. Cha, A. Mislove, and K. P. Gummadi. A

measurement-driven analysis of information propagation in
the ﬂickr social network. In Proc. of ACM International
World Wide Web Conference, pages 721–730, 2009.

[9] E. Comission. Attitudes on data protection and electronic

identity in the european union, June 2011.
http://bit.ly/wkZhGR.

[10] comScore. Google+ Reaches 20 Million Visitors in 21 Days,

July 2011. http://tinyurl.com/3ox3lp9.

[11] comScore. It’s a Social World: Top 10 Need-to-Knows

About Social Networking and Where It’s Headed, December
2011. http://tinyurl.com/cfhqxke.

169[12] T. H. Cormen, C. Stein, R. L. Rivest, and C. E. Leiserson.

Introduction to Algorithms. McGraw-Hill Higher Education,
2nd edition, 2001.

[13] D. Easley and J. Kleinberg. Networks, Crowds, and Markets:

Reasoning About a Highly Connected World. Cambridge
University Press, 2010.

[14] E. Eldon. Larry page is super excited to announce that

google+ has 90m users, January 2012.
http://tinyurl.com/82mkntq.

[15] engadget. Google+ has 250 million users, more mobile than
desktop, June 2012. http://tinyurl.com/d3ausse.

[16] J. Fogel and E. Nehmad. Internet social network

communities: Risk taking, trust, and privacy concerns.
Computers in Human Behavior, 25(1):153–160, 2009.

[17] Freshtrax. Top 10 most popular websites in china, March

2010. http://bit.ly/xgRIAq.

[18] M. Gjoka, M. Kurant, C. T. Butts, and A. Markopoulou. A

walk in facebook: Uniform sampling of users in online social
networks. CoRR, abs/0906.0060, 2009.

[19] Google. Orkut demographic data, January 2012.
http://www.orkut.com/MembersAll.

[20] R. Gross and A. Acquisti. Information revelation and privacy

in online social networks. In Proc. of ACM CCS Workshop
on Privacy in the Electronic Society, pages 71–80, 2005.

[21] V. Gundotra. Google+: 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99... 100.,

September 2011. http://bit.ly/gp_noinvite.
[22] V. Gundotra. Introducing the google+ project: Real-life

sharing, rethought for the web, June 2011.
http://bit.ly/gp_released.

[23] J. Halliday. Google+ saw 67m visits in november, with 2.7m

from uk, says comscore, January 2012.
http://tinyurl.com/7ydcnck.

[24] Q. Hardy. Google+ gains traction, researcher says, December

2011. http://nyti.ms/wrEsOx.

[25] R. Kumar, J. Novak, and A. Tomkins. Structure and
evolution of online social networks. In Proc. of ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, pages 611–617, 2006.

[26] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is twitter, a

social network or a news media? In Proc. of ACM
International World Wide Web Conference, pages 591–600,
2010.

[27] J. Leskovec and E. Horvitz. Planetary-scale views on a large

instant-messaging network. In Proc. of ACM International
World Wide Web Conference, pages 915–924, 2008.

[28] J. Leskovec, J. Kleinberg, and C. Faloutsos. Graphs over
time: densiﬁcation laws, shrinking diameters and possible
explanations. In Proc. of ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 177–187, 2005.

[29] D. Liben-Nowell, J. Novak, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, and

A. Tomkins. Geographic routing in social networks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 102(33):11623–11628, 2005.
[30] R. MacManus. Tim berners-lee calls facebook a walled

garden - is that fair?, November 2010.
http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/
tim_berners-lee_says_facebook_is_a_
walled_garden.php.

[31] S. Milgram. The small world problem. Psychology Today,

2:60–67, 1967.

[32] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. P. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and

B. Bhattacharjee. Measurement and Analysis of Online
Social Networks. In Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM Internet
Measurement Conference, 2007.

[33] J. Mitchell. Google+ is going to mess up the internet,
January 2012. http://tinyurl.com/84x7o3a.

[34] B. Poblete, R. Garcia, M. Mendoza, and A. Jaimes. Do All
Birds Tweet the Same? Characterizing Twitter Around the
World. In Proc. of ACM Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, Glasgow,UK, 2011.

[35] B. F. Ribeiro and D. F. Towsley. Estimating and sampling

graphs with multidimensional random walks. CoRR,
abs/1002.1751, 2010.

[36] T. Rodrigues, F. Benevenuto, M. Cha, K. P. Gummadi, and

V. Almeida. On Word-of-Mouth Web Based Discovery of the
Web. In Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement
Conference, 2011.

[37] S. Scellato, C. Mascolo, M. Musolesi, and V. Latora.
Distance matters: geo-social metrics for online social
networks. In Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Social
Networks, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2010. USENIX Association.

[38] T. Taraszow, E. Aristodemou, G. Shitta, Y. Laouris, and

A. Arsoy. Disclosure of personal and contact information by
young people in social networking sites: An analysis using
Facebook proﬁles as an example. International Journal of
Media and Cultural Politics, pages 81–101, 2010.

[39] J. Ugander, B. Karrer, L. Backstrom, and C. Marlow. The

anatomy of the facebook social graph. CoRR, abs/1111.4503,
2011.

[40] T. Wasserman. Google+ most popular with male users,

students, February 2012.
http://tinyurl.com/7kz2k3m.

[41] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of

‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393(6684):440–442, June
1998.

[42] ZDNet. Top 10 countries in Facebook adoption, January

2012. http://zd.net/xmA4rt.

170