Follow the Green: Growth and Dynamics in

Twitter Follower Markets

Gianluca Stringhini, Gang Wang, Manuel Egele†, Christopher Kruegel,

Giovanni Vigna, Haitao Zheng, Ben Y. Zhao
Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara

†Carnegie Mellon University

{gianluca, gangw, chris, vigna, htzheng, ravenben}@cs.ucsb.edu, megele@cmu.edu

ABSTRACT
The users of microblogging services, such as Twitter, use the count
of followers of an account as a measure of its reputation or inﬂu-
ence. For those unwilling or unable to attract followers naturally,
a growing industry of “Twitter follower markets” provides follow-
ers for sale. Some markets use fake accounts to boost the follower
count of their customers, while others rely on a pyramid scheme to
turn non-paying customers into followers for each other, and into
followers for paying customers. In this paper, we present a detailed
study of Twitter follower markets, report in detail on both the static
and dynamic properties of customers of these markets, and develop
and evaluate multiple techniques for detecting these activities. We
show that our detection system is robust and reliable, and can detect
a signiﬁcant number of customers in the wild.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 [Computer Applications]: Social and Behavioral Sciences;
K.6 [Management of Computing and Information Systems]: Se-
curity and Protection

General Terms
Measurement, Security

Keywords
Twitter, Follower Markets, Sybils, Online Social Networks

1.

INTRODUCTION

Microblogging services such as Twitter have become important
tools for personal communication as well as spreading news. Twit-
ter users can “follow” accounts that they ﬁnd interesting, and start
receiving status updates that these accounts share in real-time. As
Twitter use grows, the inﬂuence and reputation of a person or busi-
ness entity are increasingly associated with their number of Twitter
followers [8, 18]. Third party services, such as Klout, estimate the
inﬂuence of accounts ranging from normal users to celebrities and
politicians [19] based on a series of features such as the number of
followers and the frequency with which content is re-shared.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC’13, October 23–25, 2013, Barcelona, Spain.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1953-9/13/10 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2504730.2504731.

For many users hoping to achieve fame and “inﬂuence” on Twit-
ter, growing a signiﬁcant follower population is a difﬁcult and time
consuming process. Some follow random users in the hope that
these users might follow back. Others join groups where each
member agrees to follow all the others in the group. Unfortunately,
none of these techniques are efﬁcient enough for users who need
large numbers of followers fast [16].

The demand of quick Twitter followers has led to the growth of
an industry that caters to users who want to quickly grow their pop-
ulation of followers, even if it means paying for them. Some of
these “customers,” such as politicians or celebrities, might want to
give the appearance of a large fan base [4, 9, 10]. Other, more ma-
licious entities seek followers so they can quickly spread malware
and spam [12, 14, 29, 30]. We refer to such enterprises as Twitter
follower markets and to the operators as follower merchants.

There are two ways for follower merchants to deliver followers
to their customers. One way is to create fake accounts that imi-
tate real users [10, 31, 33, 34]. However, these accounts have less
“value,” as quantiﬁed by popular metrics that establish reputation
based on quantities such as a user’s follower to followee ratio and
tweets per follower. Fake accounts, or Sybils, provide lower addi-
tive value in this system, given their small follower counts and low
volume of tweets. On the other hand, legitimate accounts are more
attractive as followers to cybercriminals, because these accounts
have real followers, share content, and add real value to customers
seeking a higher reputation. Unfortunately for these markets, legit-
imate users are unlikely to voluntarily follow their customers, un-
less they were ﬁrst compromised or controlled without their knowl-
edge1.

In our work, we perform a detailed measurement study of Twit-
ter follower markets. Note that unlike prior work that studied black
markets for social network accounts [25, 31], these merchants only
provide “followers,” not access to compromised or fake accounts.
In our work, we observe two types of behavior in Twitter follower
merchants. First, some merchants provide their customers with
fake accounts (i.e., Sybils). Second, we also observe the rise of
a new type of follower merchants centered on pyramid schemes.
In this case, follower merchants lure in unsuspecting users with
promises of free followers, compromise their accounts, and then
add them as new followers to each other and (more importantly) to
other paying customers; Since these accounts are compromised by
the market operators, we call them victims. We call the operators
of pyramid markets pyramid merchants.

In this paper, we perform a comprehensive study of Twitter fol-
lower markets. First, we study in detail both the static properties

1We consider an account as compromised if a third party obtained
access to it, and is using it in a way that violates Twitter’s terms of
service [3].

163and the dynamic behavior of market customers. Then, we de-
velop and evaluate multiple techniques for detecting these activi-
ties. We ﬁrst introduced the notion of Twitter follower markets and
some ad hoc observations of pyramid merchants in our preliminary
work [28]. Compared to our preliminary work, we make the fol-
lowing contributions:

• We explored methods to detect follower markets and proac-
tively obtained ground-truth composed of 69,222 victim ac-
counts, and 2,909 market customers.

• We analyzed the characteristics of victim accounts and mar-
ket customers, with particular focus on the dynamics of their
followers. Intuitively, we expect customers of follower mar-
kets to experience dramatic increases in the number of fol-
lowers followed by a steady decrease as compromised ac-
counts unfollow. This happens because victim accounts did
not willingly follow the customers, and often times they ﬁnd
the content that the customer posts uninteresting.

• We developed a detection system that uses follower dynam-
ics to detect the customers of follower markets. We show that
our system is robust and reliable, and that it is able to detect
a large number of customers in the wild.

2. METHODOLOGY AND BACKGROUND
According to anonymous follower merchants, follower markets
have already become a multimillion-dollar business [26]. Driven by
their increasing popularity and effects on Twitter’s ecosystem, we
want to understand via empirical measurements the key characteris-
tics of these markets, particularly the newly-emerged pyramid mer-
chants, and develop effective countermeasures against them. Our
study is motivated by two observations.

First, there is no concrete understanding on the characteristics of
these markets as well as the key factors leading to their success and
impact. To the best of our knowledge, the only known prior work
is our preliminary study which detected a follower market [11].

Second, there are no effective countermeasures against these mar-
kets and follower merchants. Existing detection techniques can
spot fake accounts or spammers [5, 14, 29], but are not effective
against pyramid merchants as the purchased followers are real users.
Instead, we believe that a fundamentally different method can ef-
fectively address this challenge. Speciﬁcally, if one can identify
customers who bought Twitter followers from these markets, then
once Twitter starts to systematically and heavily penalize or even
suspend their customers, the markets will soon lose their revenue
stream and eventually go out of business.

In the remainder of the paper, we describe our efforts to empir-
ically characterize the accounts involved in follower markets and
build detection algorithms. In Section 2.1 we brieﬂy introduce the
operations of Pyramid merchants to provide background for our
study. We then discuss our data collection process (Section 3), fol-
lowed by analysis on the market characteristics (Section 4) and its
key players (Section 5). We then use insights from our analysis to
develop a comprehensive detection system for identifying the mar-
ket customers and to experiment on real Twitter data (Section 6).
2.1 Background: Pyramid Merchants

Unlike typical Twitter follower markets that trade fake accounts,
pyramid markets sell real accounts as followers. They usually offer
two kinds of subscriptions: premium and free. Premium users pay
to get the services from the market, and are mostly companies or

Figure 1: A Twitter follower market website. The market pro-
vides two options, depending on how fast the customer wants
to obtain his followers.

Figure 2: A tweet advertising a Twitter follower market. The
link in the tweet points to the homepage of the Twitter follower
market being advertised.

individuals who are interested in increasing their follower count
and reaching a broader audience (we refer to them as customers).
Free users, on the other hand, are typically offered a small num-
ber of followers for free. In exchange for this service, free users are
requested to give control of their account to the pyramid merchant.
The merchant gains control of a user account by asking the user
to authorize an OAuth application [2], or by having the user give
away her proﬁle name and password. Because these “free” sub-
scribers give control of their account to a third party, we consider
them as compromised, and refer to them as victims. The pyramid
merchants leverage their victims to carry out many tasks, from fol-
lowing other accounts to periodically tweeting advertisements for
the markets (see Figure 2 for an example). Although certain pyra-
mid markets announce to their victims that their accounts might be
used to follow other people or to send tweets, this practice violates
Twitter’s term of service [3].

In their attempt to shut down market operations, Twitter blocks
the OAuth applications that are used by such schemes. However,
pyramid merchants overcome this problem by periodically creating
new OAuth applications and using the victims’ credentials to autho-
rize such applications [11]. Furthermore, to hide their involvement
in any follower market, customers who purchased followers typi-
cally add these followers slowly. In fact, some follower markets
advertise that it can take up to one month for a customer to add
3,000 followers.

1643. DATA COLLECTION

In this section, we present our efforts to collect a large set of
Twitter accounts that actively interact with follower markets, essen-
tially building the ground-truth data on customers who bought fol-
lowers from the markets and victims who were compromised by the
markets and traded as followers. Our data collection includes two
steps. First, we locate popular follower markets. Second, we col-
lect accounts of customers and victims as well as legitimate Twitter
users for further analysis. In this section, we describe these two
steps in detail.
3.1 Locating Follower Markets

In general, a Twitter follower market offers services through a
website where customers can directly make purchases. An example
is shown in Figure 1. To locate as many markets as possible, we
explored three different approaches, including locating suspicious
clusters of Twitter accounts, searching for advertisement tweets,
and querying a search engine. We found that the search engine-
based approach is the most effective and thus used this technique
for our subsequent data collection. Next, we discuss each method
in detail.
Clustering Twitter Accounts.
We ﬁrst encountered evidence
of Twitter follower markets from our previous study [11], in which
we detected a viral Twitter campaign advertising a follower mar-
ket (Bigfollow.net). To attract customers, follower markets
often send advertising tweets (with a link to the follower market’s
website) using compromised Twitter accounts under their control
(i.e., victims). Therefore, one way of detecting these markets is
by grouping Twitter accounts that demonstrate similar suspicious
behaviors (e.g., sending similar tweets) [11]. This method, how-
ever, has two key limitations. First, not all Twitter follower markets
use Twitter to promote themselves (in particular, the non-pyramid
markets typically do not); therefore this method cannot provide full
coverage of popular markets. Second, this method also requires sig-
niﬁcant manual effort to examine suspicious clusters and exclude
benign ones and those representing non-Twitter-market campaigns.
Searching Advertisement Tweets.
The second approach is
to directly search for tweets advertising the follower markets using
the Twitter API. These tweets usually contain links pointing to the
markets and keywords like “buy Twitter followers” or “get more
followers” (Figure 2). Therefore, by searching for speciﬁc key-
words in the tweet stream, we could identify various markets. Af-
ter performing the above keyword search from the 1.4 billion tweets
that we collected from Twitter’s stream, we identiﬁed eleven Twit-
ter follower markets that send advertisement tweets in bulk. The
limitation of this approach is that it requires access to a large vol-
ume of tweets and it is also prone to false positives. Since our tweet
dataset was collected between May 13, 2011 and August 12, 2011,
we can only identify markets that actively advertised during this
time frame.
Querying Search Engine.
As it is difﬁcult to gain a com-
prehensive picture of the follower markets directly from Twitter,
we decided to leverage search engines. To attract customers, these
markets should be able to make their sites indexed by Google. We
conﬁrmed this hypothesis by sending the query “more Twitter fol-
lowers” to Google and analyzing the returned results. Other than
links to the actual Twitter follower markets, we also found links
pointing to news or blog articles talking about Twitter follower mar-
kets. For this reason, we cannot solely rely on the results returned
by Google to detect follower markets.

To distinguish between real Twitter follower markets and benign
websites, we developed a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classi-

Feature Category

URL (3)

HTML (7)

Keywords (20)

Feature Description
Level of URL depth
Length of URL
Length of domain
Number of $ sign
Number of hyper links
Number of outgoing links
Number of image tags
Number of Javascript tags
Number of buttons
Word count
twitter, followers, buy, social,
service, facebook, services, youtube,
views, likes, contact, order,
within, fans, real, marketing,
100, privacy, account, website

Table 1: Features to locate Twitter follower markets by query-
ing search engines.

Market

newfollow.info
bigfolo.com
bigfollow.net
intertwitter.com
justfollowers.in
twiends.com
socialwombat.com
devumi.com
hitfollow.info
plusfollower.info
buyactivefans.com
getmorefollows.com
followmania.co

$ for 10K
Followers

$ for 1K
(Re)Tweets

$216
$91.99

$70
$65
$95
$169
$49
$64
$214
$214
$40
$127
$48

N/A
N/A
$500
$550
N/A
N/A
$79
$97
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Twitter
Only?
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES

Pyramid?

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

Table 2: Popular Twitter follower markets. Different markets
have different prices, and some of them are not Twitter-speciﬁc.
The follower markets that do not use a pyramid scheme are
likely selling fake accounts as followers.

ﬁer. We extracted 30 features from the URL, domain, and HTML
content of the market website. The detailed features are listed in
Table 1. The keywords were chosen by mining the web pages of
known Twitter follower markets. This effectively exclude news ar-
ticle pages talking about markets, since the index page of news
portals usually has no Twitter follower markets features.

To evaluate the effectiveness of this method, we manually ver-
iﬁed the ﬁrst 100 websites returned by Google, and constructed
a ground-truth set with 56 Twitter follower markets and 44 be-
nign websites. A ten-fold cross-validation leads to a 97% accu-
racy. On February 2013, the query “more Twitter followers” of-
fered 7,210,000 results in Google, while Google only returned the
ﬁrst 680 sites. We ran the classiﬁer on all the returned 680 websites
and located 303 Twitter markets. In Table 2 we list the 13 highest-
ranked markets by Google. We believe this approach provides a
reasonable coverage of current popular Twitter follower markets.

3.2 Locating Customers and Victims

Our next step is to locate a large set of accounts corresponding to
customers and victims of the follower markets, as well as legitimate
Twitter users. We use these sets of accounts as ground-truth for our
further experiments.

165Market
BigFollow
Bigfolo
JustFollowers
NewFollow
InterTwitter
Total

2,781

Victims Customers
16,185
1,404
20,897
10,307
20,429
69,222

37
91
N/A
N/A
2,909

Table 3: Identiﬁed market victims and customers among the
six Twitter follower markets that we monitored.

Collecting Market Victims.
To identify a large number of
ground-truth victim accounts, we purchased followers from the most
popular follower markets in Table 2: NewFollow, Bigfolo, Inter-
Twitter and JustFollowers. Here InterTwitter is the only non-pyramid
market as it does not offer free-subscriptions.

Speciﬁcally, we registered one account as premium user for Big-
folo and NewFollow, and two accounts each at InterTwitter and
JustFollowers. Since our accounts were newly-created with no fol-
lowers, we consider any account that started following them a mar-
ket victim. We made our purchases on March 27, 2013. Within
two weeks we identiﬁed 53,037 victims (1,404 on Bigfolo, 20,429
on InterTwitter, 20,897 on JustFollowers, and 10,307 on NewFol-
low). However, at the end of the ﬁrst week, Twitter banned two
of our premium accounts, one at JustFollowers and another one at
Bigfolo.

Unfortunately, we were not able to buy followers from the mar-
ket BigFollow, the third highest ranked market, because their web-
site did not accept payments from our credit card. Fortunately, the
victims in this market are very recognizable, because they post very
speciﬁc tweets (i.e., the tweets contain the hashtag #BigFollow).
Therefore, we searched Twitter for tweets advertising this market,
and considered any account posting such tweets as a victim.
In
total, we identiﬁed 16,185 victims for this market.

Overall, we were able to identify 69,222 victims. We refer to
them as Av. A detailed breakdown of victims per market can be
found in Table 3.
Collecting Market Customers.
The core part of a Twitter fol-
lower market business is to sell followers. Therefore, to understand
the phenomenon we need to monitor and study the characteristics
of a set of customers in the wild. The problem with selecting a
set of customers is that it is hard to determine which accounts pur-
chased followers on Twitter. To overcome this problem, we reg-
istered 180 newly-created Twitter accounts as victims to the target
follower markets (BigFollow, NewFollow, Bigfolo, and JustFollow-
ers). We call this set of accounts Ag. Since the accounts in Ag were
newly-created, and had no followers or friends 2, we can assume
that any account that established a friend or follower relation with
them is somehow involved in the follower market (as either a vic-
tim or a customer). We did not subscribe to InterTwitter, because
their website does not offer a free subscription service. This in fact
raises an interesting question: where do the victims of this market
come from? One possibility is that InterTwitter does not use free-
subscribers as victims but uses massively-created fake accounts to
follow their customers. We will further explore this intuition in the
data analysis section (Section 5).

As previously explained, after signing up to the follower market,
victims will start following customers, as well as other victims.
For this reason, we cannot build a set of known customers just by
looking at the friends of the accounts in Ag. Instead, we leverage

2In Twitter’s jargon, a friend is a proﬁle that the account follows.

the following observation: market victims periodically post tweets
that advertise the market. Such tweets are likely to be similar across
the victims of the same market. To detect customers among the
friends of the accounts in Ag, we apply the following algorithm.
This process returns a set Ac of identiﬁed customers.

1. At the beginning, the set of known customers Ac is empty.
2. For each account a in Ag, we retrieve the tweets posted by a.
We call this set Ta. We also retrieve the set of friends that a
has, and call it Fa.

3. For each account b in Fa, we extract the set of tweets posted

by b. We call this set Tb.

4. For each tuple < t1, t2 > composed of one tweet from Ta
and one tweet from Tb, we compare t1 and t2.
If t1 and
t2 are similar, we consider b as a victim, and move to the
next account in Fa. More precisely, we consider t1 and t2
to be similar if they share four or more consecutive words
(4-grams). This similarity metric has already been used in
previous work, and has proven to be robust [11]. Note that
the accounts in Ag never posted any legitimate tweet, there-
fore our approach will only match tweets that advertise fol-
lower markets and not, for example, popular tweets that both
accounts happen to have shared.

5. If no pair < t1, t2 > resulted similar, it means that b has
never advertised the follower market. Therefore, we assume
that the owner of b paid to get her followers, and add b to the
set of known customers Ac.

In total, we identiﬁed 2,909 market customers by using the de-
scribed algorithm, 2,781 from BigFollow, 37 from Bigfolo and 91
from JustFollowers. We did not manage to identify any customer
for the market NewFollow, because Twitter suspended our victim
accounts shortly after we subscribed them, probably because the
tweets advertising the market that these accounts sent were con-
sidered spam. A summary of identiﬁed customer and victim ac-
counts is shown in Table 3. We noticed a disparity in the num-
ber of customers identiﬁed from these markets. The reason might
be that some markets are more successful than others in attracting
customers; alternatively, it might be that some markets have more
victims, and therefore each victim follows a smaller number of cus-
tomers. We will investigate these possibilities in Section 5.4. In the
rest of the paper, we refer to the entire set of 2,909 customers as
Ac.
Selecting Legitimate Users.
Finally, we wanted to gather a
large number of regular Twitter users to draw comparison with mar-
ket customers. At a high level, we selected two sets of legitimate
users for different purposes. First, we picked one set of 2 million
randomly-sampled users Alr from the general Twitter population,
which serves as baseline for our proﬁle analysis. The second set,
that we call Al, is our key legitimate user dataset, which focused on
legitimate users who are comparable with market customers. For
Al, we excluded users that are obviously non-customers (i.e. users
with a relatively low follower count). To this end, we constructed
Al by extracting another two million unique accounts whose num-
ber of followers exceeded 100. In our later analysis (Section 5),
we will show that choosing 100 as a threshold is reasonable. Both
legitimate user sets were sampled from our dataset of a stream of
10% of all public Twitter messages [11]. Note that we cannot be
sure that the accounts in Al and Alr did not purchase followers
on Twitter. However, since the accounts were collected at random,
we are conﬁdent that they are representative enough of the Twitter

166Market
BigFollow
Bigfolo
JustFollowers
NewFollow
InterTwitter
Total

Tweets
662,858
4,732,016

302

77,865

0

Victims
90,083
611,825

257

38,341

0

5,473,041

740,506

Table 4: Tweets advertising markets and victims identiﬁed in
the wild. These results show that some markets are signiﬁcantly
larger than others.

population, and that they will show different characteristics than
the set Ac, that is solely composed of customers. In fact, the results
reported in the rest of the paper conﬁrm this assumption.
Summary.
In total, we identiﬁed 4 million legitimate users
(Alr and Al), 69,220 market victims (Av) and 2,909 market cus-
tomers (Ac) for analysis. Using this dataset as our ground-truth,
we analyze the behavior patterns of different parties that interact
with Twitter follower markets. Then, we leverage potential behav-
ior features to build systems to detect customers on Twitter. We will
illustrate the details of the performed analysis and of the proposed
detection in the following sections.

4. ANALYZING FOLLOWER MARKETS

In this section we analyze the Twitter follower markets that we
discovered. In particular, we study the size of these markets and
the price distribution for their offered services.
4.1 Market Prices

All the markets that we found offer Twitter followers for sale.
Some of them offer additional services related to Twitter, such as
having a tweet chosen by the customer retweeted a number of times.
In addition, some of the markets do not only provide Twitter-related
services but also target other social networks such as Facebook and
Youtube.

The price for buying Twitter followers varies depending on the
market, and ranges from $40 to $216 for 10,000 followers. Some
markets go further, offering followers of a certain guaranteed “qual-
ity” (for example, each of the purchased followers will have 100 or
more followers of their own). Intuitively, having “high quality” fol-
lowers makes it possible to reach a broader audience, in case some
of them retweet messages posted by the customer. The price for
promotional tweets and retweets on the markets that we identiﬁed
varies between $79 and $550 for 1,000 tweets (or retweets). In gen-
eral, pyramid markets charge higher than non-pyramid markets as
they can deliver real, compromised users as followers.
4.2 Market Sizes

We want to understand how prominent the Twitter follower mar-
kets are within the Twitter ecosystem, and in particular how many
victims they are able to recruit. To answer this question, we searched
for tweets advertising these markets in the Twitter stream. In par-
ticular, we had access to a random 10% sample of all public tweets
for the period between January 16, 2013 and May 7, 2013. This
accounted for 3.3 billion total tweets. To detect tweets advertising
the markets in this stream, we proceeded as follows:

1. We group victim accounts in Av based on the market that
they belong to. For each market, we extract the set of victims
of that particular market, which we call Am.

2. We group the tweets sent by the accounts in Am, based on
text similarity. In particular, we group together those tweets
that share four or more identical words.

3. For each group of tweets of size greater than one, we extract
the URLs and hashtags contained in those tweets. We add
these keywords to the set Km of keywords indicative of the
market m.

4. For each keyword in Km, we search the Twitter stream for
tweets containing that word. We consider every hit as a tweet
advertising the market m, and the account that posted the
tweet as a victim of m.

The results are shown in Table 4. Although these results were
derived from only 10% of the total tweets, the sheer volume of the
victims is signiﬁcant, conﬁrming the impact of the follower mar-
kets on Twitter. Moreover, Twitter has a particularly hard time in
dealing with this problem: since victims are usually legitimate ac-
counts that got compromised, Twitter cannot just suspend them,
but has to try alternative mitigation techniques, such as blocking
the OAuth applications that are used by these markets.

Across the ﬁve identiﬁed markets, Bigfolo appears to be larger
than the others, followed by BigFollow and NewFollow. JustFol-
lowers appears to be considerably smaller. Our analysis on Inter-
Twitter terminated at step 2 where we did not ﬁnd similar tweets
across victims advertising the market. Since InterTwitter does not
offer a free subscription, it is likely that the victims are fake ac-
counts with no real followers. Thus there is no point for victims to
post advertisement tweets to attract more victims.

We then looked at the number of victims who advertise more
than one market. These are users who, to get more “free” followers,
handed out their credentials to multiple markets. In total, we found
that only 22,702 out of 740K (or 3%) victims advertise more than
one market.

We suspect that the size difference across these markets is the
key reason of why the number of identiﬁed customers varies signif-
icantly across the markets. In particular, the fact that Bigfolo has so
many more victims might mean that each victim follows a smaller
number of customers, and therefore makes it harder for us to iden-
tify these customers. In Section 5.4, we will discuss more on how
each follower merchant “distributes” their victims to service their
customers.

5. ANALYZING CUSTOMERS AND VICTIMS

In this section, we analyze the characteristics of the key play-
ers of Twitter follower markets: market customers and victims, and
we compare them to the characteristics of regular Twitter accounts.
The goal is to identify behavioral features that can effectively dis-
tinguish between the follower purchasing phenomenon and an or-
ganic follower growth, typical of legitimate users.
5.1 Customer Account Characteristics

We ﬁrst characterize the differences between market customers
and legitimate accounts. We start by analyzing static character-
istics of Twitter accounts, such as the current number of follow-
ers or friends that an account has. Figure 3 shows the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of the number of followers of market
customers in Ac and 2 million randomly-sampled legitimate users
Alr. Compared with regular Twitter users, market customers typi-
cally have more followers. The ﬁgure also indicates that customers
typically have more than 100 followers.

Another interesting aspect is that, as Figure 4 shows, legitimate
Twitter accounts typically have a more balanced follower-to-friend

167Figure 3: Cumulative distribution function of the number of
followers of market customers, compared to legitimate users.
Customers typically have one hundred followers or more.

Figure 4: Cumulative distribution function of the follower
to friend ratio of market customers, compared to legitimate
users. 20% of market customers have at least ten times more
followers than friends.

Figure 5: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the number of followers that ever
unfollowed the customer.

Figure 6: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the average time it takes before fol-
lowers unfollow the customer.

Figure 7: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the number of followers that ever
unfollow-then-refollow the customer.

ratio (i.e., the number of followers an account has, divided by its
number of friends) compared to accounts that purchased followers.
In particular, 20% of the customers in Ac have at least ten times
more followers than friends, while 98% of legitimate users in Alr
cannot achieve this. In addition, about 50% of the customers have
more friends than followers. It turns out that despite buying fol-
lowers, these customers also use other techniques to increase their
number of followers, such as massively following random users
with the expectation that some of them will follow back.

To analyze the people who followed the customers in Ac, we
crawled the follower list of the accounts in Ac on an hourly basis,
from January 23, 2013 to May 7, 2013. We call the sequence of
the followers for an account, crawled over multiple hours, follower
dynamics for that account.

One of our hypothesis is that some market victims, who un-
willingly followed a customer, would eventually unfollow the cus-
tomer. So here, we try to verify whether customers in Ac lose fol-
lowers over time. Figure 5 plots the distribution of the number of
followers that ever unfollowed the accounts in Ac. It shows that
almost all the customers from the three markets have lost followers
during our observation time. About 70% of customers have lost
more than 100 followers. Figure 6 shows how long the “following”
relationship will last before followers unfollow the accounts in Ac.
It shows that the BigFollow market provides followers with better
loyalty, as 80% of the average “following” relationship can last at
least 2 weeks. Victims of the other two markets usually unfollow
the customer within 2 weeks.

We also observe that some followers who unfollowed customers
would follow them again. Figure 7 shows the number of followers

that ever unfollow-then-refollow the customer. This might indicate
that some customers have bought the service more than once, and
that the markets use the same set of victims for the same customer.
5.2 Follower Dynamics

We then wanted to understand whether there are differences in
the way in which legitimate users and market customers acquire
their followers over time. The datasets used to analyze follower
dynamics are Al and Ac. Similarly to what we did for Ac, the
follower dynamics for the accounts in Al were also collected by
crawling their followers on an hourly basis, from January 23, 2013
to May 7, 2013. To this end, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne a model for the
dynamics of Twitter followers.

We deﬁne the current ﬂuctuation in followers for an account a as

∆a[fh] = fh − fh−1,

where h is the current observation period (of an hour). In a nutshell,
∆a[fh] represents the number of followers that account a gained
(or lost) during hour h. Given this basic deﬁnition, we deﬁne four
characteristics in the follower dynamics of an account: increases
in followers, steady decreases in followers, intervals of stationary
followers, and follower ﬂuctuations.
Increases in Followers.
Twitter accounts tend to increase the
number of their followers over time. Generally, users experience a
regular increase in followers, and sudden spikes in the number of
followers are rare for legitimate users. On the other hand, those ac-
counts that purchase followers might have many of these followers
added in a short period of time. Given an account a, we say that
the account experienced a follower increase of height t if, during

 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)Number of FollowersLegitimateCustomer 0 20 40 60 80 100 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000CDF (%)Follower to Friend RatioLegitimateCustomer 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)# of Lost FollowersBigFollowJustFollowersBigfolo 0 20 40 60 80 100 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50CDF (%)Average Unfollow Speed (Day)BigfoloJustFollowersBigFollow 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000CDF (%)# of Refollowed FollowersBigFollowJustFollowersBigfolo168Figure 8: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the sudden increase of followers ex-
perienced by customers, compared to le-
gitimate proﬁles.

Figure 9: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the maximum period of follower
decrease experienced by customers, com-
pared to legitimate proﬁles.

Figure 10: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the maximum period of constant
followers experienced by customers, com-
pared to legitimate proﬁles.

(a) 1-hour Interval

(b) 12-hour Interval

(c) 24-hour Interval

Figure 11: Cumulative distribution function of the follower ﬂuctuation with different interval lengths for market customers and
legitimate users. Increasing the observation period, market customers show higher ﬂuctuations than legitimate users.

the hour of observation, ∆a[fh] for the account is greater or equal
than t.

To investigate these differences, we analyzed the dynamic char-
acteristics of the users in Al and Ac. What we observed is that it is
more common for market customers to experience a large increase
in followers over a one-hour period than it is for legitimate users.
Figure 8 shows this phenomenon. In particular, it is quite common
for market customers (20%) to experience increases of 50 or more
followers during a period of an hour, while only a small fraction
(0.4%) of legitimate accounts experience the same.
Steady Decreases in Followers.
Legitimate users get followed
because they share interesting content, and engage their audience.
Market customers, however, are usually trying to promote them-
selves or a brand, and the content that they share is not considered
useful by many users. For this reason, many of the followers that a
customer bought are likely to unfollow him after a certain time. We
already veriﬁed this hypothesis in Section 5.1. Given an account a,
we say that a experiences a steady decrease in followers of length
d hours if, for a number d of consecutive hours, ∆a[fh] has been
negative (i.e., the account lost followers).

Figure 9 shows the CDF of the longest sequence of consecutive
hours in which customers and legitimate users lost followers, over
an observation period of one week. As it can be seen, the accounts
in Ac show long periods in which they lose followers. In particular,
60% of the customers of BigFollow experienced periods of 10 or
more consecutive hours in which their followers steadily decreased.
Intervals of Stationary Followers.
Although Twitter accounts
experience variations in their number of followers, we expect this
number of followers to change slowly over time. In fact, most Twit-
ter accounts will keep the same number of followers over periods
of multiple hours, while market customers tend to constantly ex-
perience increases in followers or decreases in the number of their

followers. For this reason, we expect legitimate Twitter accounts
to show intervals of multiple hours in which their followers do not
change more often than market customers. Given an account a, we
say that a experienced an interval of constant followers of length
d hours if, for a number d of consecutive hours, ∆a[fh] has been
equal to zero.

Figure 10 shows the CDF of the longest sequence of consecutive
hours in which market customers and legitimate users kept their
followers unchanged, over an observation period of one week. As
it can be seen, 30% of legitimate users did not experience changes
in their followers at all. On the other hand, market customers rarely
have their followers remain constant for longer than ten consecutive
hours.
Follower Fluctuations.
An important aspect in follower dy-
namics is the ﬂuctuation of followers. Twitter accounts gain and
lose followers, depending on how interesting the content that they
share is, as well as other factors. In general, we expect the follower
ﬂuctuations of legitimate Twitter accounts to be rather small. On
the other hand, accounts that bought followers are likely to show
ﬂuctuations that are more pronounced.

To investigate this phenomenon, we deﬁne the change in the

number of followers over a period of n hours as

∆a[fnh] = fh − fh−n.

We then look for consecutive intervals of length n hours in which
this variation had the same sign (positive or negative). For each
interval in which the follower variation had the same sign, we cal-
culate the total number of followers that the account gained (or lost)
during that interval. By doing this, two consecutive intervals will
have opposite signs, indicating, for example, an interval in which
the followers of an account increased steadily, followed by an inter-
val in which its followers decreased. Given two consecutive inter-

 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)Maximum increase in followersLegitimateBigFollowBigfoloJustFollowers 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000CDF (%)Maximum consequent hours of follower decreaseLegitimateBigfoloJustFollowersBigFollow 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000CDF (%)Maximum consequent hours of constant followersBigfoloJustFollowersBigFollowLegitimate 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)Follower FluctuationLegitimateBigFollowBigfoloJustFollowers 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)Follower FluctuationLegitimateBigFollowBigfoloJustFollowers 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)Follower FluctuationLegitimateBigFollowBigfoloJustFollowers169Figure 12: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the number of other victims that
market victims followed.

Figure 13: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the total number of unique friends
of victim accounts.

Figure 14: Cumulative distribution func-
tion of the number of friends that a victims
unfollowed.

vals, we deﬁne the follower ﬂuctuation F ln for periods of length n
between those two intervals as the absolute value of the difference
between the change of followers in the two intervals.

Intuitively, we expect accounts that have bought followers to
show higher ﬂuctuations than legitimate accounts. To verify this
assumption, we calculated the ﬂuctuation of followers for the ac-
counts in Al and Ac over a period length n of one hour, twelve
hours, and 24 hours. For each account, we calculated the maximum
value of F ln observed during the measurement period. Figure 11
shows the CDFs for these ﬂuctuations. As it can be seen, legit-
imate accounts experience relatively low ﬂuctuations, while cus-
tomers tend to experience larger ones. Also, using longer time in-
tervals (12 and 24 hours) leads to better distinction between the two
groups of users. This indicates that both legitimate users and cus-
tomers would experience short-terms ﬂuctuations, while in the long
term the ﬂuctuations experienced by customers are more evident.
5.3 Victim Account Characteristics

Figure 15: Number of customers that victims followed. Some
markets have their victims follow many customers, while others
have each victim follow a small number of customers.

In this section, we analyze the characteristics of victims in Av.
We want to understand whether victims tend to follow other victims
of the same market. Also, we want to verify whether victims would
consistently follow and then unfollow other users.

In order to check the following behavior of users in Av, we
crawled their friend list (i.e., users they follow) every two hours
from April 3, 2013 to April 30, 2013. During the data collection
period, we observed that some of the victims got banned by Twitter.
The victims of InterTwitter were suspended more frequently (31%
) than the victims from other markets (BigFollow 8%, Bigfolo 11%,
JustFollowers 17%, and NewFollow 23%). Note that InterTwitter
is the only market among these ﬁve that does not offer a free-
subscription service. It is likely that InterTwitter recruits victims
by massively creating fake accounts, and existing countermeasures
already detect such accounts. On the other hand, the remaining
markets sell real accounts as followers. For Twitter, dealing with
these accounts is more challenging, because blocking them might
generate complaints by the accounts’ owners.

To study the characteristics of victim accounts, we ﬁrst want to
see whether victims would follow each other. Figure 12 shows
the distribution of the number of other victims that a victim fol-
lowed. As shown, most victims of the markets Bigfolo, BigFollow
and NewFollow would follow other victims. This way, victims can
increase each other’s follower count. However, the vast majority
(more than 95% of them) of victims of JustFollowers followed at
most one other victim from the same market. Victims of InterTwit-
ter also show a low interconnection between victims: more than
90% of the victims have followed less than 3 other victims. Since
InterTwitter does not offer free-subscriptions, victims do not have
to follow each other. For JustFollowers, one possible explanation
is that this market is considerably smaller compared to the others.

This is conﬁrmed by the number of victims for this market that we
identiﬁed in the wild (see Table 4).

Figure 13 shows the total number of friends of the victim ac-
counts in Av. This number is a cumulative count of all friends that
we observed during the data collection period. We can see that
victims of InterTwitter and JustFollowers strictly limit their num-
ber of friends below 500, while victims of the other three markets
would follow more people. Normally, the friend count of a Twitter
account cannot exceed 2,000, which is the hard limit set by Twit-
ter. A small portion (about 10%) of victims of the markets Bigfolo,
BigFollow and NewFollow have followed more than 2,000 people
during one month. The possible explanation is that victims would
unfollow some of their friends in order to follow new ones. This
can be conﬁrmed in Figure 14, which shows the number of friends
that the victims in Av unfollowed during the data collection period.
As we can see, market victims typically unfollow many of their
friends. For example, 90% of the victims of Bigfolo have unfol-
lowed more than 100 people during the period that we observed,
while 30% of victims have unfollowed more than 1,000 people.
Previous research showed that it is not uncommon for legitimate
Twitter users to unfollow other proﬁles, but at rates a lot lower than
this [22].
5.4 Different Strategies for Operating Markets
As we have observed, the Twitter follower markets that we have
analyzed share common traits, but also feature distinguished char-
acteristics.
In this section, we study the different strategies that
follower merchants use to operate their markets, and analyze ad-
vantages and disadvantages of these strategies.

The most evident difference is that the followers offered by In-
terTwitter seem to be fake accounts, unlike those of all other mar-

 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000CDF (%)# of Victim FriendsJustFollowersInterTwitterBigFollowNewFollowBigfolo 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1e+06CDF (%)# of FriendsJustFollowersInterTwitterBigFollowNewFollowBigfolo 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1e+06CDF (%)# of Unfollowed FriendsJustFollowersInterTwitterBigFollowNewFollowBigfolo 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000CDF (%)# of Followed CustomersJustFollowersBigfoloBigFollow170kets, which are real accounts. The ﬁrst consequence of this choice
is that such followers will not provide an increase in popularity to
their customers, but just an increase in their follower count. Fake
accounts will not purchase the products advertised by the customer,
for instance. In addition, as we have shown, it is easier for Twitter
to deal with fake accounts, because the social network can just sus-
pend them, without anybody complaining. The follower merchants
can create new fake accounts, but this is not effortless.

The main difference between the other three markets (BigFol-
low, Bigfolo, and JustFollowers) is in the way they manage their
victims. First of all, as we showed in Section 4.2, some markets
can count on more victims than others. Intuitively, the victims of
the larger markets will have less connections to the customers of
the market, meaning that each victim will follow a smaller number
of customers. Figure 15 shows the CDF of how many accounts in
Ac are followed by the victims in Av. As it can be seen, the victims
of JustFollowers follow a very small number of customers, while
the ones of Bigfolo and BigFollow follow a larger number of them.
Another way in which follower merchants can control the way in
which they deliver followers is how fast they add them: as we have
shown in Figure 8, BigFollow provides customers in a more abrupt
way than Bigfolo and JustFollowers. Another interesting aspect is
whether follower merchants provide the same followers twice, in
case the customer purchased their service more than once. As we
show in Figure 7, JustFollowers and Bigfolo tend to give the same
followers to their users more than once more often than BigFollow.
Given the number of tweets advertising these two markets that we
observed in the wild, and that are summarized in Table 4, the rea-
son for this is probably that Bigfollow can count on a larger number
of victims, while JustFollowers is a lot smaller.

6. DETECTING MARKET CUSTOMERS

Previously we analyzed the characteristics of market victims and
customers. Some of these characteristics can be leveraged to de-
tect accounts that purchased followers on Twitter (i.e., market cus-
tomers). Detecting customers is very important to ﬁght against the
phenomenon of Twitter follower markets: while crooks can com-
promise more accounts and sell them as followers, it is much harder
for them to attract new customers, especially if Twitter starts to sys-
tematically suspend customer accounts. In principle, Twitter could
start suspending customer accounts, because they are violating the
terms of service that speciﬁcally prohibit to take part in Twitter fol-
lower market activity [3]. However, to date we are not aware of any
countermeasures taken by Twitter against market customers.

We propose a method that leverages the dynamics of the follow-
ers of an account, and raises an anomaly if they show the patterns
that we described in Section 5.2. We also explore different ﬁlters
that can help in discarding many accounts that are unlikely to be
customers, and a classiﬁer that can tell if an account is likely a mar-
ket customer just by looking at its static characteristics. Eventually,
we discuss how these techniques can be used in combination, and
leverage them to detect customers in the wild.
6.1 Follower Dynamics Detection

As explained in Section 5.2, Twitter follower market customers
tend to experience sudden increases in their followers, and steady
decreases of the number of their followers for long periods of time.
We are interested in leveraging these observations to detect ac-
counts whose owners bought followers on Twitter (i.e., customers).
To this end, we observe the follower dynamics of Twitter accounts
for a number d of observation periods (hours), and we leverage the
follower dynamics that are typical of accounts that bought follow-
ers to detect customers in the wild. Based on our observations,

we developed three types of features to perform this task: increase
features, decrease features, and stationary followers features. We
describe them in detail in the following.
Increase Features.
These features count the number of times
during the observation period in which an account experienced an
increase in followers higher or equal than t during one hour. We
deﬁne 1,000 features of this type, with t ranging from 1 to 1,000.
Decrease Features.
These features count the number of periods
of length l hours in which the followers of a user steadily decreased.
We deﬁne d features of this type, where the length of the steady
decrease ranges from 1 hour to d hours.
Stationary Features.
These features are similar to the steady
decrease features, but look for consecutive hour intervals in which
the user’s number of followers did not change. Again, we deﬁne d
features, from 1 hour to d hours.

In Section 5.2 we deﬁned another characteristic of the follower
dynamics of an account, the follower ﬂuctuation. However, this
characteristic embodies the same information provided by the in-
crease and decrease features. In particular, if we look for accounts
that ever experienced a sudden increase of followers of height greater
or equal than 15, or that experienced a steady decrease in follow-
ers that lasted for at least ten hours, we already cover 97.6% of
the accounts in Ac. On the other hand, only 1% of the accounts in
Al show the same characteristics. Since the follower ﬂuctuation is
more resource-intensive to compute than the increase and decrease
features, we decided not to use this type of features for our classi-
ﬁcation.

When analyzing follower dynamics, we have to observe Twit-
ter accounts for a certain period of time. One of the challenges is
to determine the optimum length of the observation period. If we
picked an observation period that is too short, our system would
probably not be able to observe the dynamics typical of market
customers during that period. Also, the dynamics that are typical
of a purchase of followers do not last forever, but instead tend to
stabilize after a certain point. For this reason, to successfully detect
a customer, we need the purchase to happen during our observation
period, or shortly before it. We experimented with different obser-
vation periods, and found that having an observation period of one
week (d =168 hours) is a good choice. In the next section, we
perform an analysis of the classiﬁer built from these features.

6.1.1 Dynamics-based Classiﬁer Evaluation
We built a classiﬁer based on the follower dynamics features,
and analyzed its efﬁciency. To this end, leveraged Support Vec-
tor Machines trained with Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO)
for classiﬁcation [27] as provided by the WEKA machine learning
toolkit [15].

For our training set, we leveraged the set Ac as examples of ac-
counts that bought followers, and a random set of 10,000 accounts
from Al as examples of legitimate accounts. We call this set Alt.
We then extracted the follower dynamics for the accounts in our
training set, for the period between April 16, 2013 and April 23,
2013. A ten-fold cross validation on this dataset shows that the
classiﬁer works well. We obtained a true positive rate of 98.4%
among the market customers, and a false positive rate close to zero:
only two of the proﬁles in Alt were ﬂagged as customers. The rea-
son for this is that both accounts experienced several high increases
in followers during the observation period. By manually analyzing
these accounts, one was a foreign news site, and is probably a false
positive, while the other one is belongs to a local DJ. We cannot
tell if this particular account is a false positive or not.

171The features that are most representative of a market customer
are high increases in followers. However, it is very rare for a cus-
tomer to experience an increase of more than 200 followers during
an hour. Long intervals of steady decreases in followers (longer
than ten consecutive hours) are also indicative of customers. Sur-
prisingly however, shorter intervals (one or two hours) of steady
decreases in followers are more common in legitimate accounts.
The stationary features have less inﬂuence on the model.

Although this classiﬁer is very strong, a market might try to
avoid detection, by adding followers slowly. We argue that while
customers of such a market might not look suspicious with regard
to the features that deal with increases in followers, they will still
show anomalous steady decreases in followers, because this is not
an element that the follower merchants have control over.
6.2 Static Detection of Customers

We showed that it is possible to reliably detect accounts that
bought followers on Twitter by looking at their follower dynam-
ics. However, this method requires to observe an account for a long
period of time. In our case in particular, it is unfeasible to monitor
the whole population of Twitter, because Twitter limits us in the
number of API calls that we can perform per hour. To be able to
run our customer detection system at Twitter scale, we would need
a lightweight system that discards as many benign users as possible
before we start tracking the possible customers, to analyze their dy-
namics. To this end, we analyzed three possible strategies: using a
follower ﬁlter, a static ﬁlter, or a static classiﬁer. In the following,
we analyze the three methods in detail.
Follower Filter.
As Figure 3 illustrates, almost all market cus-
tomers have more than 100 followers. Conversely, 26% of legiti-
mate Twitter users are below that threshold. This shows that a quick
way of getting rid of proﬁles that are unlikely to be customers is
considering only accounts that have more than a hundred follow-
ers. In practice, this is what we already did by using the dataset Al
as our test dataset.
Static Filter.
A more advanced way of ﬁltering out accounts
that are unlikely to be market customers is looking at static char-
acteristics of a proﬁle, such as the number of followers and the
number of friends. The idea is to leverage the observations that we
discussed in Section 5.1 to identify possible customer candidates.
In the following, we describe the features used by this static ﬁlter
in detail.

• Number of Friends. This is the number of friends of the

Twitter account.

• Number of Followers. As we previously explained, mar-
ket customers have, on average, more followers than normal
Twitter users.

• More Followers than Friends. As we show in Figure 4, it is
slightly more likely for market customers to have more fol-
lowers than friends than it is for legitimate users. This feature
is Boolean, and it is set to one if the number of followers is
higher than the number of friends.

• Followers to Friends Ratio. As we show in Figure 4, cus-
tomer accounts tend to have a higher follower-to-friend ratio
than legitimate users.

This ﬁlter has the advantage of being fast, and being able to
quickly discard accounts that are most probably not market cus-
tomers. However, since it only takes into account the number of
friends and followers of an account, it might generate many false

Dynamic Classiﬁer
SVM (SMO)
Static Filter
Random Forest (cost-sensitive)
Static Classiﬁer
Decision Tree
Random Forest

TP rate
FP rate
98.4% 0.02%
TP rate
FP rate
63%
93.7%
FP rate
TP rate
3.7%
90%
91%
3.3%

Table 5: Performance of the different classiﬁers. The dynamic
classiﬁer has both high recall and low false positives. The static
methods are useful as preﬁlters to discard as many accounts
that are unlikely to be market customers as possible.

positives. Since we use this ﬁlter to discard accounts that are not
likely to be market customers, before starting to monitor account
dynamics, this is not a big problem.
Static Classiﬁer.
To be more precise in assessing whether an
account is likely a market customer or not, we can add two addi-
tional features to the static ﬁlter.

• Inﬂuence. For a legitimate account, having a high number of
followers means that people ﬁnd this account interesting, and
re-share the content that the account posts often. This indi-
cates that such an account has high inﬂuence. Accounts that
bought their followers, typically do not have very engaged
audiences. We used the Klout service to measure an account
inﬂuence [19]. This service analyzes the activity of Twitter
accounts, and returns an inﬂuence score that is function of
how many followers, mentions, and retweets an account has.
This score performs well in our case. However, any service
that provided a similar information would work for our pur-
poses.

• Number of Victim Followers. Since Twitter follower mar-
kets use compromised accounts as followers for their cus-
tomers, we expect market customers to be followed by many
victims. To calculate this feature, for each follower b, of an
account a, we look for tweets advertising an account market,
similar to what we did in Section 3.2. We set this feature to
the number of followers that follow a and have advertised a
Twitter follower market.

The static classiﬁer is more robust than the static ﬁlter, because
it takes into account information about the activity of the account,
as well as its social network. However, as we will see, it is not as
lightweight.

In the following, we analyze the performance of the static ﬁlter
and the static classiﬁer, and describe their advantages and disad-
vantages.
6.2.1 Evaluation of the Static Methods
We performed an analysis of the two methods listed in the pre-
vious section: the static ﬁlter and the static classiﬁer. Similarly to
what we did for the follower dynamics classiﬁer, we used the ac-
counts in Ac as examples of market customers, and the accounts in
Alt as examples of legitimate users.

Our goal with the static ﬁlter is to discard as many benign ac-
counts as possible, and analyze the remaining ones with the dy-
namic classiﬁer. To perform this task, we require recall to be high,
but allow false positives. First, we performed a 10-fold cross val-
idation on the training dataset for the static ﬁlter. To this end, we
used random forests, and we penalized a false negative 100 times

172more than a false positive. The 10-fold cross validation returned a
true positive rate of 93.7%, and a false positive rate of 63%. As we
can see, the static ﬁlter is able to detect most customer accounts,
and is able to cut the number of candidates for the dynamic classi-
ﬁer by almost a half. Therefore, it is a useful pre-ﬁlter.

We then wanted to understand how much the features added to
the static classiﬁer improve over the simple ﬁlter, and whether per-
forming this type of classiﬁcation could be useful. To this end, we
ﬁrst performed a 10-fold cross validation, using decision trees. The
10-fold cross validation returned a true positive rate of 90%, and
a false positive rate of 3.7%. The most important features in the
decision tree were, in order, the number of followers, whether the
account has more friends than followers, and the inﬂuence score.
A random forest algorithm gave slightly better results [24], with a
true positive rate of 91%, and a false positive rate of 3.3%. The
results that we obtained for different approaches are summarized
in Table 5.

The 10-fold cross validation on the static classiﬁer shows that the
features that we developed are effective in discriminating between
users who acquired followers in a legitimate fashion and those who
purchased followers. In principle, we could use this approach to
detect market customers in the wild. Unfortunately, from our per-
spective, Twitter limits the number of API calls that we can make
in an hour. Some of the features that we described, in particular the
“Number of Victim Followers” and the “Inﬂuence” ones, require
many API calls to compute, since they require us to download the
timeline for every single follower that an account has, as well as the
past tweets of the user. For these reasons, although we acknowl-
edge that the static classiﬁer might help in detecting customers in
the wild, we did not use it to this end.

A market customer might evade detection by the static classi-
ﬁer by using other means of getting followers in conjunction with
purchasing them. For example, a customer who constantly fol-
lows random users, and gets followed by a fraction of them, would
have a more balanced number of friends and followers than average
market customers, and might avoid detection. However, Twitter is
already monitoring and blocking accounts that show this behav-
ior [32].
6.3 Possible Uses of the Two Methods

We presented a method to monitor the follower dynamics of
Twitter accounts, and determine if they increased their followers
organically, or they purchased followers. This method works very
well, but is not instantaneous, since it requires a long observation
period before making a decision (in our setup, a week). Also, mon-
itoring the follower dynamics of Twitter accounts is resource in-
tensive. To mitigate these problems, we developed two methods
to discard those accounts that are unlikely to be market customers
(follower ﬁlter and static ﬁlter), and a method to tell if a proﬁle
is likely a market customer by only looking at it (static classiﬁer).
There are different ways in which these techniques can be com-
bined effectively.

The most reasonable deployment would be applying the follower
ﬁlter, followed by the static classiﬁer ﬁrst. Both methods are fast,
and work well in discarding unlikely customers. Then, we can ap-
ply the dynamics classiﬁer to the remaining set of accounts. We
investigate this possible setup in the next section. Another possible
deployment is to use the dynamic and the static classiﬁer in paral-
lel. As we have mentioned in the previous sections, both classiﬁers
might be actively evaded by follower merchants and customers, and
having two detection mechanisms in place might help in detecting
these evasive accounts.

6.4 Detecting Customers in the Wild

We ran our detection algorithms on Al.

In particular, we ex-
tracted the follower dynamics for the 2 million accounts for a pe-
riod of two weeks, from April 19, 2013 to May 3, 2013.

First, we ran our dynamic classiﬁer over the two-week data, on
each week separately. Our system ﬂagged 684 accounts as market
customers. As we explained previously, this means that these ac-
counts purchased followers during our observation period, or right
before that, and that they showed follower dynamics that are typ-
ical of market customers. By manually looking at those accounts,
they mostly belonged to wanna-be celebrities or small businesses,
which is the type of accounts that we would expect to purchase
Twitter followers to bootstrap their popularity. Although it is not
possible to establish precise ground truth for our results, none of
the detected customers looked like a false positive (for example, no
account belonged to an established celebrity or a popular business).
We then looked at how applying the ﬁlter methods that we dis-
cussed in Section 6.3 would have affected our results. As we have
shown in Figure 3, applying the follower ﬁlter would discard be-
tween 20 and 30% legitimate Twitter accounts, while keeping the
vast majority of customers in the candidate set. For our purposes,
we do not need to apply this ﬁlter, since the accounts in Al have
been selected to have more than 100 followers. We then applied
the static ﬁlter to the accounts in Al. In total, the ﬁlter discarded
983,810 accounts, almost cutting the candidate set in half. After
applying this ﬁlter, we ran the dynamics classiﬁer on the remaining
accounts. Our system ﬂagged 631 accounts as market customers.
This means that the static ﬁlter is fairly successful in keeping most
customers in the candidate set – 92.3% of the total detected cus-
tomers were still in it – and shows that having a static ﬁlter is a
good option if the number of accounts that one can monitor is lim-
ited (like in our case).
6.5 Analysis of the Identiﬁed Customers

In this section, we analyze the characteristics of the 684 market
customers that we identiﬁed. These customers are detected by the
dynamic classiﬁer, so not surprisingly, their dynamic characteris-
tics are very similar to the ones of the customers in the training
dataset Ac. We found that their static characteristics show strong
customer-like signals too: Figure 16 shows the distribution of the
number of followers of the identiﬁed customers, compared to le-
gitimate users. The identiﬁed customers typically have more than
1,000 followers, which is more than the number of followers for
80% of the regular Twitter user population. In addition, Figure 17
shows that the follower-to-friend ratio of identiﬁed customers is
typically higher than one.

As we said, by manually looking at the identiﬁed customers we
found that those accounts mostly belong to small businesses or
wannabe celebrities, who try to boost their popularity. We then
wanted to assess whether the purchase of followers actually helps
in this process. To this end, we analyzed the inﬂuence score of these
customers, according to Klout [19]. The CDF of the inﬂuence of
the identiﬁed customers is shown in Figure 18, indicating that about
half the customers have a Klout score lower than 45. However, the
median Klout score of Twitter accounts is precisely 45 [1] (on a
scale 1-100). This shows that, although purchasing followers can
boost an account’s social network, it does not really help in making
the account popular. Since the followers did not willingly follow
the proﬁle, it is unlikely that they will engage the user, and share
her content.

As a last element, we wanted to understand whether Twitter is
detecting and blocking these customer accounts. After one week
from detecting them, only two accounts had been suspended by

173Figure 16: Followers of identiﬁed cus-
tomers and legitimate users.

Figure 17: Follower-friend ratio of identi-
ﬁed customers and legitimate users.

Figure 18: Inﬂuence (Klout) score of iden-
tiﬁed customers.

Twitter. This shows that it is hard for Twitter to detect which ac-
counts purchased followers, and that the type of techniques pro-
posed in this paper could actively help Twitter in ﬁghting this phe-
nomenon.

7. DISCUSSION

Follower markets enable dishonest users on social networks and
microblogging sites to inﬂate their perceived credibility. Due to the
lack of alternative means to gauge a user’s inﬂuence, social net-
work users often take the number of connections of an account as
face-value for the account’s inﬂuence. The techniques proposed in
this work can help the social network operator to automatically de-
tect the participants in these follower markets. More importantly,
our system distinguishes between customers and victims of these
schemes. This distinction allows the social network operator to
focus mitigation approaches on market customers and potentially
disrupt the economic foundations of follower market services. Fur-
thermore, unsuspecting victims need not be punished and their par-
ticipation in the social network can continue. As a consequence,
the intuition that accounts with many followers are inﬂuential is
restored.

Additionally, our techniques can also be leveraged by users that
strive to keep their online social networking relations conﬁned to
trustworthy peers. To this end, a user can employ our techniques to
identify market customers among the users in her social graph. Due
to the high precision of our detection system, the user can remove
the identiﬁed market customers from her social graph without fear
that she would break connections to legitimate users in the social
network.

Of course, once our detection mechanism impacts the bottom
line of follower markets, follower merchants might try to adapt
their operations to evade our techniques. However, our detection
techniques leverage a key observation about the victims of these
services – the fact that many victims unfollow the customers the
merchants connect them to. Therefore, as long as follower mar-
kets exploit real victims for their operations we expect that these
characteristics will persist. Follower merchants can still slow down
the rate at which victims are added to customers to evade detec-
tion. While this would be a viable long term strategy for the fol-
lower merchants, it dramatically impacts one of the markets’ key
promises – to gain followers fast. These considerations do not ap-
ply to those follower markets that use fake accounts instead of real
ones. However, this modus operandi has higher operational costs
and overhead for the follower merchants, because they have to cre-
ate and manage a substantial number of fake accounts. Such an
operation by itself is non-trivial at best and would expose these
fake accounts to existing detection techniques already employed
by today’s online social networks.

8. RELATED WORK

Over the last few years, many researchers focused their studies
on Twitter, and online social networks [8, 20–22, 35, 36]. In par-
ticular, several works showed the security threats linked to the use
of social networks [12–14]. Previous research showed that one of
the main advantages of spreading malicious content through social
networks is that users are more likely to click on content posted on
these media than they are of doing so for more traditional media
(e.g., email) [6, 17].

Researchers developed several systems to detect malicious ac-
tivity on social networks such as Twitter. Early systems focused
on spammers and fake accounts (Sybils), and developed feature-
based detection systems [5, 23, 29]. Others rely on the social net-
work structure and detect clustered malicious accounts in the so-
cial graph [7, 37]. These techniques give a good ﬁrst-level defense
against social network threats.

More recently, miscreants started to send malicious content from
legitimate accounts that had been compromised [12,14]. Detecting
compromised accounts is a very different problem compared to de-
tecting fake ones, because such accounts can have a long history
of legitimate activity, and typically do not show similar character-
istics. Existing systems either look at the URLs that the malicious
messages point to [30], at accounts that send the same malicious
content in large-scale campaigns [12], or look for accounts that
suddenly change their typical behavior [11].

Most existing detection techniques focus on the actual accounts
sending out offending content. Once detected, social network ad-
ministrators can suspend these malicious accounts. However, this
modus operandi does not fundamentally remove the threats, as more
malicious accounts could be created, or other legitimate proﬁles
could get compromised. In this paper, we propose to detect and
disrupt Twitter follower market operations by identifying and pos-
sibly suspending the accounts that fund these malicious enterprises
– the markets’ customers. By doing this, we hope to cause a ma-
jor economical hit to the Twitter follower market schemes, up to a
point in which they will not be proﬁtable anymore.

Thomas et al. studied marketplaces where miscreants can buy
fake accounts, and use them to spread malicious content [31]. In-
stead, we focus on markets that sell followers to their customers.
The concept of Twitter follower markets was ﬁrst introduced in our
previous work [28]. In this paper, we studied the phenomenon more
broadly, and focused on characterizing the behavioral patterns of
key players of account markets.
In particular, we leveraged the
follow/unfollow dynamics to detect market customers, which the
previous approach did not explore. Kwak et al. studied the unfol-
low dynamics on Twitter with a focus on normal users [21], while
our study leveraged unfollow dynamics for anomaly detection from
a security angle.

 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000CDF (%)Number of FollowersLegitimateCustomer 0 20 40 60 80 100 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000CDF (%)Follower to Friends RatioLegitimateCustomer 0 20 40 60 80 100 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90CDF (%)Influence ScoreCustomer1749. CONCLUSIONS

Our work studies Twitter follower markets, where followers are
sold to customers for a fee. We use ground-truth to reveal interest-
ing patterns in the dynamics of the users involved in these markets,
and in particular, the follower populations of their customers. We
use our insights to build a system for detecting these behaviors in
the wild, and use real experiments to show that it is both scalable
and robust.

10. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR)
under Grant N000140911042, the Army Research Ofﬁce (ARO)
under grant W911NF0910553, the National Science Foundation
(NSF) under grant CNS-0845559 and grant CNS-0905537, and Se-
cure Business Austria. Gang Wang, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y.
Zhao were partially supported by NSF grants IIS-0916307, CNS-
1224100, IIS-1321083, and DARPA grant BAA-12-01. Any opin-
ions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re-
ﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation.

We would like to thank our shepherd Cecilia Mascolo for her
support, and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful com-
ments and observations.

11. REFERENCES
[1] Klout blog.

http://corp.klout.com/blog/2011/11/do-
you-have-google-klout/?goback=%2Egmp_
4159546%2Egde_4159546_member_212786154.

[2] Oauth community site. http://oauth.net.
[3] Twitter terms of service. http://support.twitter.

com/articles/18311-the-twitter-rules.

[4] Justin Bieber Twitter followers 50% fake says report, 2013.
[5] BENVENUTO, F., MAGNO, G., RODRIGUES, T., AND

ALMEIDA, V. Detecting Spammers on Twitter. In
Conference on Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS) (2010).

[6] BILGE, L., STRUFE, T., BALZAROTTI, D., AND KIRDA, E.

All Your Contacts Are Belong to Us: Automated Identity
Theft Attacks on Social Networks. In World Wide Web
Conference (WWW) (2009).

[7] CAI, Z., AND JERMAINE, C. The latent community model

for detecting sybils in social networks. In Symposium on
Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) (2012).

[8] CHA, M., HADDADI, H., BENVENUTO, F., AND

GUMMADI, K. Measuring User Inﬂuence in Twitter: The
Million Follower Fallacy. In International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media (2010).

[9] COLDEWEY, D. Romney twitter account gets upsurge in

fake followers, but from where? NBC News (2012).

[10] CONSIDINE, A. Buying their way to twitter fame. The New

York Times (2012).

[11] EGELE, M., STRINGHINI, G., KRUEGEL, C., AND VIGNA,

G. COMPA: Detecting Compromised Accounts on Social
Networks. In Symposium on Network and Distributed System
Security (NDSS) (2013).

[12] GAO, H., HU, J., WILSON, C., LI, Z., CHEN, Y., AND

ZHAO, B. Detecting and Characterizing Social Spam
Campaigns. In ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement
Conference (2010).

[13] GHOSH, S., VISWANATH, B., KOOTI, F., SHARMA, N. K.,

KORLAM, G., BENEVENUTO, F., GANGULY, N., AND

GUMMADI, K. P. Understanding and combating link
farming in the twitter social network. In World Wide Web
Conference (WWW) (2012).

[14] GRIER, C., THOMAS, K., PAXSON, V., AND ZHANG, M.
@spam: the underground on 140 characters or less. In ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(CCS) (2010).

[15] HALL, M., FRANK, E., HOLMES, G., PFAHRINGER, B.,

REUTEMANN, P., AND WITTEN, I. H. The weka data
mining software: an update. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 11, 1
(Nov. 2009), 10–18.

[16] HUTTO, C. J., YARDI, S., AND GILBERT, E. A longitudinal
study of follow predictors on twitter. In SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) (2013).

[17] JAGATIC, T., JOHNSON, N., JAKOBSSON, M., AND

JAGATIF, T. Social phishing. CACM 50, 10 (2007), 94–100.
[18] KING, R. How companies use Twitter to bolster their brands.

In BusinessWeek Online (2008).
[19] klout. http://klout.com.
[20] KRISHNAMURTHY, B., GILL, P., , AND ARITT, M. A few
chirps about twitter. In USENIX Workshop on Online Social
Networks (2008).

[21] KWAK, H., CHUN, H., AND MOON, S. Fragile online

relationship: a ﬁrst look at unfollow dynamics in twitter. In
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI) (2011).

[22] KWAK, H., LEE, C., PARK, H., AND MOON, S. What is
Twitter, a social network or a news media? In World Wide
Web Conference (WWW) (2010).

[23] LEE, K., CAVERLEE, J., AND WEBB, S. Uncovering social

spammers: social honeypots + machine learning. In
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (2010).

[24] LIAW, A., AND WIENER, M. Classiﬁcation and regression

by randomforest. R news (2002).

[25] MOTOYAMA, M., MCCOY, D., LEVCHENKO, K., SAVAGE,
S., AND VOELKER, G. An analysis of underground forums.
In ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference
(2011).

[26] PERLROTH, N. Fake twitter followers become

multimillion-dollar business. The New York Times (2013).

[27] PLATT, J. C. Fast training of support vector machines using

sequential minimal optimization. In Advances in Kernel
Methods - Support Vector Learning (1998).

[28] STRINGHINI, G., EGELE, M., KRUEGEL, C., AND VIGNA,

G. Poultry Markets: On the Underground Economy of
Twitter Followers. In SIGCOMM Workshop on Online Social
Networks (2012).

[29] STRINGHINI, G., KRUEGEL, C., AND VIGNA, G. Detecting

Spammers on Social Networks. In Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference (ACSAC) (2010).

[30] THOMAS, K., GRIER, C., MA, J., PAXSON, V., AND

SONG, D. Design and Evaluation of a Real-Time URL Spam
Filtering Service. In IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (2011).

[31] THOMAS, K. AND MCCOY, D. AND GRIER, C. AND
KOLCZ, A. AND PAXSON, V. Trafﬁcking Fraudulent
Accounts: The Role of the Underground Market in Twitter
Spam and Abuse. In USENIX Security Symposium (2013).

[32] TWITTER. The twitter rules.

http://support.twitter.com/entries/
18311-the-twitter-rules, 2010.

175[33] WANG, G., KONOLIGE, T., WILSON, C., WANG, X.,
ZHENG, H., AND ZHAO, B. Y. You are how you click:
Clickstream analysis for sybil detection. In USENIX Security
Symposium (Washington, DC, 2013).

[34] WANG, G., MOHANLAL, M., WILSON, C., WANG, X.,

METZGER, M., ZHENG, H., AND ZHAO, B. Y. Social
Turing tests: Crowdsourcing sybil detection. In Symposium
on Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) (2013).
[35] WILSON, C., BOE, B., SALA, A., PUTTASWAMY, K., AND

ZHAO, B. User Interactions in Social Networks and Their

Implications. In ACM European conference on Computer
systems (EuroSys) (2009).

[36] YANG, C., HARKREADER, R., AND GU, G. Die Free or

Live Hard? Empirical Evaluation and New Design for
Fighting Evolving Twitter Spammers. In Symposium on
Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection (RAID) (2011).

[37] YU, H., KAMINSKY, M., GIBBONS, P., AND FLAXMAN,

A. Sybilguard: defending against sybil attacks via social
networks. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review (2006).

176