The Dark Menace: Characterizing Network-based Attacks

in the Cloud

Rui Miao ∗

∗ University of Southern California

Rahul Potharaju ‡ Minlan Yu∗
‡ Microsoft

Navendu Jain†
† Microsoft Research

ABSTRACT
As the cloud computing market continues to grow, the cloud plat-
form is becoming an attractive target for attackers to disrupt ser-
vices and steal data, and to compromise resources to launch at-
tacks. In this paper, using three months of NetFlow data in 2013
from a large cloud provider, we present the ﬁrst large-scale char-
acterization of inbound attacks towards the cloud and outbound at-
tacks from the cloud. We investigate nine types of attacks ranging
from network-level attacks such as DDoS to application-level at-
tacks such as SQL injection and spam. Our analysis covers the
complexity, intensity, duration, and distribution of these attacks,
highlighting the key challenges in defending against attacks in the
cloud. By characterizing the diversity of cloud attacks, we aim to
motivate the research community towards developing future secu-
rity solutions for cloud systems.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Security and pro-
tection; C.2.3 [Network Operations]: Network management

General Terms
Measurement, Security

Keywords
Attack Characterization; Network-based Attacks; DDoS

1.

INTRODUCTION

The cloud computing market reached $40 billion in 2014 with
a rapid growth of 23%-27% per year [1]. Hosting tens of thou-
sands of online services, the cloud platform is increasingly becom-
ing both the target and source of attacks. A recent survey of data
center operators indicates that half of them experienced DDoS at-
tacks, with 94% of those experiencing regular attacks [17]. More-
over, attackers can abuse hosted services or compromise VMs [30]
in the cloud to target external sites via deploying botnets [29], send-
ing spam [33, 44], selling VMs in the underground economy [23,
49], or launching DDoS attacks [21]. In April 2011, an attack on

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
IMC’15, October 28–30, 2015, Tokyo, Japan.
c(cid:13) 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3848-6/15/10 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2815675.2815707.

the Sony Playstation network compromising more than 100 million
customer accounts was carried out by a malicious service hosted on
Amazon EC2 [20]. While there have been some reports of individ-
ual attacks on enterprise and cloud networks [10, 29], to the best
of our knowledge, there have not been any systematic measurement
studies of attacks on and off the cloud which can guide the design of
attack detection and mitigation systems. In fact, little has been pub-
lished about the prevalence, diversity, and characteristics of these
cloud-based attacks.

In this paper we investigate over 200 TB of NetFlow records
collected from dozens of edge routers spread across multiple ge-
ographically distributed data centers of a major cloud provider. We
group trafﬁc based on public virtual IPs (VIPs) assigned to each
cloud hosted service. We identify network-based attacks from the
NetFlow data using four key features as also used in prior work [19,
32, 38, 48]: (1) signiﬁcant trafﬁc volume (e.g., packets per sec-
ond), (2) abnormal fan-in or fan-out (e.g., number of unique clients
or number of connections), (3) abnormal packet header signatures
(e.g., TCP ﬂags), and (4) communication with Internet malicious
hosts [37]. Using these features, we identiﬁed nine types of attacks,
ranging from various DDoS attacks to application-level attacks such
as SQL injection and spam.

Due to sampling in the NetFlow data used in our study and the
fact that NetFlow lacks application-level information, we do not
aim at identifying all the attacks in the cloud.
Instead, our goal
is to understand the characteristics of attacks using low overhead
network-level information typically collected in many data center
networks. Thus, we take a conservative approach of setting the
attack detection thresholds to ensure that most of the attacks we
detect are real attacks.1

We validate the detected attacks against alerts from deployed se-
curity appliances and incident reports written by operators. Our de-
tected attacks cover 78.5% of the inbound attack alerts from DDoS
protection appliances and 83.7% of the incident reports on out-
bound attacks, due to the NetFlow sampling used in our study and
our conservative approach. Note that the cloud provider we stud-
ied deploys a combination of software and hardware appliances to
protect the infrastructure against such attacks.

Our broader goal is to (a) understand the key characteristics of
these attacks to evaluate the effectiveness of existing DDoS mit-
igation approaches and (b) analyze their implications on building
cloud-scale attack detection and mitigation solutions.

Although there have been many studies on Internet attacks, this
paper presents one of the ﬁrst analysis of the key characteristics of
attacks to and from the cloud based on a three-month dataset.

1These attacks may also include some trafﬁc anomalies caused by
ﬂash crowds or misconﬁgurations. We do not distinguish them be-
cause they all impact cloud services and it is an open problem to
accurately distinguish them from benign trafﬁc.

169We make the following main observations:

for inbound and outbound attacks (Section 3).

• We identify nine types of attacks and quantify their frequencies
• We ﬁnd that most VIPs experiencing attacks only incur one at-
tack incident in a day. There is a very small fraction of VIPs that
experience or generate many attacks (Section 4).
• We ﬁnd multi-vector attacks and combinations of inbound and
outbound attacks on the same VIP. While most attacks target only
one VIP, there are a few cases of multiple attacks that target 20-
60 VIPs simultaneously (Section 4).
• We observe high variations in attack throughput across time and
VIPs, requiring cloud security solutions to have dynamic resource
allocation over time and multiplexing of resources across VIPs.
Attacks often have short duration (within 10 minutes), which re-
quire fast attack detection and mitigation (Section 5).
• We investigate the origins and targets of inbound and outbound
attacks and identiﬁed the major types of Internet ASes that are
involved in cloud-related attacks (Section 6).

Scope and Limitations. Our study analyzed trafﬁc data from a sin-
gle cloud provider and thus it may not generalize to other providers.
However, the scale and diversity of our dataset, and our conversa-
tion with security operators (having a broader industry view and
some having worked at other cloud networks) suggests that similar
security challenges are likely faced by other providers. We col-
lected NetFlow records from data center edge routers before they
are ﬁltered by the security appliances. Thus, the attacks we de-
tected should not be interpreted as impacting the cloud infrastruc-
ture or services. Finally, since the trafﬁc measurement is at one-
minute granularity, it is likely to smooth the effect of short-lived
attack spikes. Overall, our study highlights the need for develop-
ing programmable (to handle attack diversity), scalable (to handle
varying intensity), and ﬂexible approaches (for individual tenants)
to protect against attacks.

2. DATASETS AND METHODOLOGY

We ﬁrst present the basic setup in a major cloud provider we stud-
ied, and then describe the datasets we collected and the methodol-
ogy for characterizing attacks.
2.1 Cloud provider overview

The cloud network we study comprises 10+ geographically dis-
tributed data centers across America, Europe, Asia, and Oceania,
which are connected to each other and to the Internet via edge
routers. Each data center hosts tens to hundreds of thousands of
servers. The cloud provider hosts more than 10,000 services includ-
ing web services, mobile application services, database and storage
services, and data analytics. Each service is assigned a public vir-
tual IP (VIP). The trafﬁc to the VIP is load balanced across a group
of virtual machines hosting the service; sometimes these VMs are
located across multiple data centers.

Such scale of services makes the cloud an attractive target for
inbound attacks.
Incoming trafﬁc to different services ﬁrst tra-
verses the edge routers and then the commercial security appliances
(e.g., Arbor [17]). These security appliances, typically designed
for enterprise-scale deployments, analyze inbound trafﬁc to protect
against a variety of well-known attacks such as TCP SYN ﬂood,
UDP ﬂood, ICMP ﬂood, and TCP NULL attacks; these appliances
use NetFlow records for trafﬁc monitoring. However, the detection
logic is often limited to known high-volume attacks. Thus they risk
missing other low-volume attack types which aim to probe vulnera-
bilities but that do not impact the cloud infrastructure such as stealth
port scans and application-level attacks e.g., spam, SQL injection.

To reduce false positives (noisy alerts), trafﬁc thresholds for alert-
ing can be set either on a per-tenant basis or across tenant groups
on these devices.

Attackers can also abuse the cloud resources to launch outbound
attacks. For instance, they can ﬁrst launch brute-force attacks (e.g.,
password guessing) to compromise vulnerable VMs in the cloud.
These compromised VMs may then be used for YouTube click fraud,
BitTorrent hosting, Bitcoin mining, spamming, malware propaga-
tion, or launching DDoS attacks. To mitigate outbound attacks, the
cloud provider we studied enforces several security mechanisms in-
cluding limiting the outbound bandwidth per VM, preventing IP
spooﬁng of egress trafﬁc, shutting down the misbehaving VMs and
isolating anomalous trafﬁc. To our knowledge, no prior work has
characterized the prevalence of outbound attacks from the cloud.
2.2 Dataset and attack detection methodology
We obtained more than 200TB NetFlow logs from a major cloud
provider over three months (May, Nov, and Dec 2013). The Net-
Flow logs collected for our study had a 1 in 4096 packet sampling
rate for both inbound and outbound trafﬁc at the edge routers of the
data centers, and aggregated over one-minute windows.2 Since the
edge routers (where we collect the logs) are located upstream of the
security appliances, the attacks we detect are likely mitigated before
they reach VMs hosting services in the cloud. We analyze the Net-
Flow data on Cosmos, a large scalable data storage system using
SCOPE [26], a programming framework similar to Map-Reduce.
Our SCOPE scripts use C# and SQL-like queries to perform the
analysis described below.

We aggregate the NetFlow data by VIP in each one-minute win-
dow, and study the trafﬁc to a VIP (inbound trafﬁc) and from the
same VIP (outbound trafﬁc). For each VIP in each time window,
we ﬁrst ﬁlter the trafﬁc based on the protocol number (e.g., UDP),
TCP ﬂags (e.g., TCP SYN), or port numbers (e.g., SQL trafﬁc is
ﬁltered by TCP trafﬁc with destination port 1433 or 3306). We then
identify nine types of attacks listed in Table 1. Our attack detection
is based on the following four network-level features:
Volume-based: Many volume-based attacks try to exhaust server
or infrastructure resources (e.g., memory, bandwidth) by sending
a large volume of trafﬁc via a speciﬁc protocol such as TCP SYN
and UDP ﬂoods, and DNS reﬂection attacks. We capture volume-
based attacks by identifying trafﬁc with large relative spikes. We
use sequential change point detection [19, 32] by comparing the
trafﬁc volume at the current time window with the Exponentially
Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) of the past 10 time windows.
We then compare the difference with a change threshold of 100
packets per minute in NetFlow (1:4096 sampling rate), correspond-
ing to an estimated value of about 7K pps in the original trafﬁc. The
threshold is suggested by the cloud security team based on the net-
work capacity and prior attack incidents. As shown in Section 3.2,
using such threshold settings, we can verify many of the attacks
reported in the attack alerts and the incident reports.
Spread-based: For many services (e.g., mail, SQL, SSH), a sin-
gle VIP typically connects to only a few Internet hosts in normal
operation. Thus, if a VIP communicates with a large number of
Internet hosts, it is likely an anomaly. To identify such anomalies,
we use the NetFlow data to compute the spread of a VIP (i.e., the
number of distinct Internet IPs communicating with a VIP during
a time window) for inbound and outbound trafﬁc. We then capture
the relative spikes of the spread using sequential change point de-

2All the trafﬁc volume numbers we show in the paper are estimated
volumes calculated based on the number in the NetFlow data and
the sampling rate.

170Attacks

Description

Net/App

Target

TCP SYN ﬂood

UDP ﬂood

ICMP ﬂood

DNS reﬂection

Spam

Brute-force

SQL injection

Port scan

Send many TCP SYN, UDP, ICMP
packets to random or ﬁxed ports on a
server

A large number of DNS responses sent
to a target from DNS servers (triggered
by DNS requests sent by attackers with

spoofed source addresses)

Launch email spam to multiple SMTP

servers

Scan weak passwords or administrative

control (using RDP, SSH, VNC)

Send different SQL queries to exploit

software vulnerabilities

Scan for open ports (using NULL, Xmas

packets)

Malicious web
activity (TDS)

Communicate with hosts on malicious

web infrastructure

Net

Net

Net

App

App

App

App

Net

App

Server
resources
Network
bandwidth

Server
resources

Network
bandwidth

Users
Server

vulnerability
SQL server
vulnerability

Server

vulnerability

Network
features
#pkts/min

#pkts/min

#pkts/min

Detection
method

Volume-based

Inactive
timeout
1 min

Volume-based

1 min

Volume-based

120 min

#pkts/min

Volume-based

60 min

fan-in/out ratio

Spread-based

fan-in/out ratio,

#conn/min
#conn/min

#conn/min

Users

src IP/dst IP

60 min

60 min

30 min

60 min

120 min

Spread-based

Spread-based

Signature-based,

Spread-based
Communication
pattern-based

Table 1: Summary of the network-based attacks in the cloud we studied.

tection. Such spread-based detection of brute-force attacks has also
been used in prior work [31]. We choose 10 and 20 Internet IPs
as the threshold for brute-force and spam, respectively, and 30 con-
nections for SQL in the sampled NetFlow, as recommended by the
cloud security team.
Signature-based: Although packet payloads are not logged in our
NetFlow data, we can still detect some attacks by examining the
TCP ﬂag signatures. Port scanning and stack ﬁngerprinting tools
use TCP ﬂag settings that violate protocol speciﬁcations (and as
such, they are not used by normal trafﬁc ) [6, 40]. For instance, the
TCP NULL port scan sends TCP packets without any TCP ﬂags,
and the TCP Xmas port scan sends TCP packets with FIN, PSH,
and URG ﬂags (Table 1). If a VIP receives a packet with an illegal
TCP ﬂag setting during a time window, we mark the time window
as under an attack. Since the NetFlow data is sampled, even a single
logged packet may represent a signiﬁcant number of packets with
illegal TCP ﬂag settings in the original trafﬁc.
Communication pattern based: Previous security studies have
identiﬁed blacklists of IPs in the Internet. We can identify attacks
by ﬁltering VIP trafﬁc communicating with such blacklisted IPs.
For example, the Trafﬁc Distribution System (TDS) [37] includes
a list of dedicated hosts that deliver malicious web content on the
Internet. Since these hosts are hardly reachable via web links from
legitimate sources, it is likely that cloud VIPs communicating with
these hosts are involved in malicious web activities. In particular,
these VIPs are either a victim of inbound attacks (e.g., spam, ma-
licious advertising) or that they have been compromised to launch
outbound attacks (e.g., drive-by downloads, scams, and phishing).
Note that it is not always possible to infer the direction of an at-
tack involving TDS nodes because some SYN packets may not get
sampled in the NetFlow data. Thus, we distinguish the inbound
from outbound communication pattern based attacks based on the
destination IP in the ﬂow records.
Counting the number of unique attacks. Given the attacks in
each one minute time window, we identify the attack incidents that
last multiple time windows for the same VIP. Due to NetFlow’s
low sampling rate, we may not be able to detect an attack over its
entire duration. Therefore, similar to previous work [38, 40, 48],

(a) Inbound

(b) Outbound

Figure 1: The distribution of inactive time for each attack type; the
x-axis is on log-scale.

we group multiple attack windows as a single attack where the last
attack interval is followed by T inactive windows (i.e., no attacks).
Instead of selecting a ﬁxed T , we choose to select different T
for different attacks based on analyzing the distributions of inactive
times between two consecutive attack minutes of each type for both

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1 10 100 1000 10000CDFInactive Time (min)between two consecutive attack intervalsSYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-forceSQLPortScanTDS 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1 10 100 1000 10000CDFInactive Time (min)between two consecutive attack intervalsSYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-forceSQLPortScanTDS171counted for 40% of the total outbound spam instances in May. The
spam trafﬁc came from hundreds of VIPs towards thousands of ex-
ternal mail servers from email providers such as Yahoo and Lycos,
enterprises like CenturyLink, and small clouds like SoftLayer. We
observed prevalent on-off trafﬁc pattern from the spamming VIPs.
Speciﬁcally, each VIP generated slow rate spam trafﬁc with a me-
dian of 2266 packets per second over a median of one hour period.
It then subsided completely over a median of 5 hours, and launched
new attacks again. We investigated these VIPs with the security
team and found that most of these VIPs are free trial accounts which
were quickly shut down. About 98% of these VIPs were new with
no spam trafﬁc recorded before, and the remaining ones were slow
spammers lasting up to a month.
Brute-force attacks: Remote connection protocols like SSH, RDP
(Remote Desktop Protocol), and VNC (Virtual Network Comput-
ing) often have just a few connections to a single VIP. If we observe
many connections in the sampled NetFlow, they are likely caused
by malicious behaviors such as password guessing (i.e., brute-force
attacks). We observed that inbound brute-force attacks have a me-
dian of 24 distinct hosts communicating with a single VIP just in
the sampled NetFlow data (i.e., there are likely other Internet hosts
communicating with the VIP that are not in our sampled data). At
the tail, a VIP can receive SSH trafﬁc from up to 10K distinct hosts
from the sampled NetFlow data. This can be caused by an attacker
controlling multiple Internet hosts to try out different passwords in
parallel. Outbound brute-force attacks have a median of 60 distinct
hosts targeted by the same VIP in the sampled NetFlow data. This
may be because the VIP is scanning a set of Internet servers with
the same set of passwords. There are about 4 times more outbound
brute-force attacks than inbound and more SSH-based brute-force
attacks compared to the RDP ones, likely because the servers run-
ning in the cloud often use random ports (e.g., for RDP), and thus
they are less likely to experience brute-force attacks compared to
Internet hosts.
SQL injection attacks: Some attackers send a variety of malware
SQL queries to exploit the vulnerability of SQL servers [16, 18].
Although these attacks are in the application layer, we can still ob-
serve such attacks in the network layer when there is a large number
of connections issued towards SQL database servers. It is likely that
they are exploiting all possible malformed user inputs to gain unau-
thorized access [16]. There are about 5 times more outbound SQL
attacks compared to the inbound attacks.
Port scan: We observe many inbound port scan attacks such as
TCP NULL and Xmas attacks. For example, we observed inbound
trafﬁc of 125k TCP NULL packets per second lasting for 4 minutes.
Attackers usually leverage these packets to sneak through ﬁrewalls
and packet ﬁlters that only handles normal TCP packets [6]. More-
over, there is a signiﬁcant number of inbound TCP RST packets,
which are likely caused by Internet hosts spooﬁng the IPs in the
cloud, leading to TCP RST signals to be directed to VIPs inside the
cloud. There are much fewer outbound port scans.
Malicious web activities (TDS): There are 0.039% of VIPs in-
volved in communicating with TDS hosts in the Internet. These
TDS hosts often use source ports uniformly distributed between
1024 and 5000. There is one attack incident with 89 unique In-
ternet TDS IPs communicating with a single VIP with 31K packets
per second lasting for 98 minutes.
Summary: There are more outbound attacks than inbound attacks
(64.9% vs 35.1%). This implies that it is relatively easier for at-
tackers to abuse cloud resources to launch outbound attacks than
to attack the cloud-hosted tenants due to improved security over
the years. At the same time, new security mechanisms need to

Figure 2: Percentage of total inbound and outbound attacks.

inbound and outbound attacks, as shown in Figure 1. We select the
T value by generating a linear regression line between each point
and the 99 percentile of each attack distribution curve and check-
ing that the average R-squared [28] value for regression models of
inbound and outbound curves is above 85%. We summarize the
inactive timeout values we use for different attacks in Table 1.

3. ATTACK OVERVIEW AND VALIDATION
In this section we ﬁrst give an overview of each type of inbound
and outbound attack observed in our study. For validation, we com-
pare these detected attacks using inbound attack alerts from DDoS
security appliances and the attack incident reports.
3.1 Attack Overview

Figure 2 shows the distribution of inbound and outbound attacks;
absolute counts omitted due to conﬁdentiality and privacy concerns.
Flood attacks: Flood attacks (TCP, UDP, ICMP ﬂoods) in the
Internet domain have been widely studied [39], and they can be
launched in both inbound and outbound directions. Our analysis
identiﬁed a signiﬁcant increase of inbound ﬂood attacks during Nov
and Dec compared to May (breakdown by month not shown), pos-
sibly to disrupt the e-commerce sites hosted in the cloud during the
busy holiday shopping season. UDP ﬂoods are often against media
services hosted in the cloud and on HTTP ports. We also observe
that there are about 5 times more outbound TCP SYN and about
2 times more UDP ﬂoods than inbound. This is likely because it
is easier for attackers to leverage cloud resources to attack Internet
users, while it is harder to attack the cloud where operators have
high level of security expertise and many attacks ﬂoods can be ﬁl-
tered by commercial security appliances.
DNS reﬂection attacks: The DNS reﬂection attack is one of the
most common ampliﬁcation attacks in the Internet. It has received
increasing attention from DDoS protection services [10, 17].
In
DNS reﬂection attacks, attackers send DNS requests toward mul-
tiple open DNS servers with spoofed source address of the target,
which results in a large number of DNS responses to the target from
DNS servers. Since the cloud has its own DNS servers to answer
DNS queries from hosted tenants, there should not be any DNS re-
sponses from the Internet to the cloud. Therefore, any activity of
inbound DNS responses may signify a potential DNS reﬂection at-
tack. Inbound DNS reﬂection attacks often come from up to 6K
distinct sources (with 1500 byte full-size packets). We only ob-
served outbound DNS responses from a single VIP hosting a DNS
server at 5666 packets per second for a couple of days repeatedly.
Spam: Email services often communicate with a stable number of
clients at any given time. If we see a large deviation in the num-
ber of email ﬂows, they are likely to be spam. For instance, we
observed an outbound spam eruption on a single day, which ac-

 0 5 10 15 20 25SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-forceSQLPort-ScanTDSPercentage (%)InboundOutbound172Attack

TCP SYN ﬂood
UDP ﬂood
ICMP ﬂood
DNS reﬂection
Spam
Brute-force
SQL injection
port scan
TDS
Others(Malware
hosting/phishing)
Total

Inbound

#detected/#alerts

Outbound

#detected/#reports

98/197
403/442

0/0
-
-
-
-
3/3
-
-

8/8
4/4
0/0
10/10
55/55
27/34
4/4
0/0
-

0/14

504/642=78.5%

108/129=83.7%

Table 2: Detected inbound alerts and outbound incident reports (“-”
means that the alerts or reports do not support the attack type).

be developed to reduce the outbound attacks. The inbound attacks
are dominated by ﬂood attacks, brute-force attacks, port scan, and
TDS attacks, while the outbound attacks are dominated by ﬂood at-
tacks, brute-force attacks, SQL attacks, and TDS attacks. While our
study focuses on characterizing the diversity of cloud attacks, com-
paring across attack categories (e.g., by impact, trafﬁc thresholds)
may also reveal interesting insights. However, deﬁning a universal
metric to compare attack types is difﬁcult because it requires nor-
malizing the attack data across diverse metrics e.g., quantifying the
impact of an attack in terms of the service downtime, privacy com-
promise, and the number of users impacted. Further, some of these
measures may not be known till long after the attack happened. In
Section 4, we study one aspect of how VIPs are affected by different
attacks and leave the broader analysis to future work.
3.2 Validation

In a large heterogeneous network, it is difﬁcult to verify whether
all the detected attacks are real because it requires a snapshot of the
actual trafﬁc and the runtime application and system state before
and during the attack. This problem becomes even harder given the
coarsely sampled NetFlow data available for our analysis. We col-
lect the security records including alerts from the DDoS protection
hardware appliances for inbound attacks and the incident reports for
outbound attacks. We compare our detected attacks with the alerts
and incident reports to identify the attacks we miss. Note that the
cloud provider deploys software and hardware security appliances
to safeguard against these attacks so they should not be interpreted
as impacting the infrastructure or tenants.
Inbound attacks: The cloud provider detects and mitigates in-
bound attacks using a combination of software and hardware DDoS
protection appliances. These appliances generate alerts about TCP
SYN ﬂoods, UDP ﬂoods, ICMP ﬂoods, and TCP NULL scan. Note
that on hardware security appliances, the trafﬁc thresholds are typ-
ically set to handle only the high-volume attacks (low-volume at-
tacks don’t cause any impact to the cloud infrastructure due to high
network capacity) over a large time window, and these appliances
aggregate multiple incidents together that occur close in time. There-
fore, to do a side-by-side comparison with alerts from these devices,
we also ﬁrst group the attacks we detected based on the VIP, attack
type and time window. We found that 73.2% of these attack in-
stances were correlated. This is due to the fact that we set the trafﬁc
thresholds to (a) cover a broad range of inbound attacks, and (b)
detect these attacks in their early stages. To check the latter hypoth-
esis, we measured the detection latency of hardware security ap-

pliances by randomly sampling a few attack instances over a week
and observed that these appliances detected them after an order of
tens of seconds delays on average. In comparison, our detection ap-
proach (in ofﬂine mode) signaled the attack based on the NetFlow
data for these instances within a minute.

Table 2 shows the number of alerts in each type and those alerts
that we also detected. Overall, we successfully identiﬁed 78.5% of
the alerts from hardware security appliances in our detected attacks.
The remaining alerts are missed by our detection approach because
of the low sampling in the NetFlow data and the false positives of
these alerts. For other types of attacks, the cloud relies on individual
tenants to detect and report them. However, we did not have the
ground truth data to validate them.
Outbound attacks. The cloud security team detects every poten-
tial outbound attack, but they do not necessarily log all of them
as incident reports to avoid false positives. Speciﬁcally, only the
cases of anomalous activity reported by external sites are logged
as incidents. Similar to inbound attacks, the cloud provider uses
security appliances to mitigate the outbound attacks. The cloud se-
curity team may receive a complaint from an ISP when they notice
malicious trafﬁc originating from the cloud provider. Given such a
complaint, the security team checks the logs of security appliances
and investigates the corresponding tenant proﬁle and payment in-
formation, and generates an incident report. Moreover, when the
security team receives a complaint, the team may do trafﬁc analy-
sis for deeper investigation; they may also perform the VHD (Vir-
tual Hard Disk) forensic analysis on behalf of the customer if the
customer (who owns the VHD) requested it. Based on these in-
vestigations, the security team creates incident reports logging their
ﬁndings such as the “attack” or “no attack found” label. We use
NetSieve [45] to extract the attack information from these incident
reports, and then compare it with our detected outbound attacks.

Since these incident reports come from Internet users’ complaints,
there is a large number of short-term transient attacks that are not
covered by these reports. Therefore, we focus on the false negatives
of those attacks that we missed in our approach when we compare
with incident reports, rather than those attacks that we detect but
are missed in these reports. For those attacks that are not covered
by the incident reports, we randomly picked a few attacks for each
type and investigated them. The attacks for which the packet traces
got logged were veriﬁed as being mitigated by the security team.

Table 2 shows the number of incident reports (labeled as “at-
tacks”) and those that are also detected by our approach. We detect
most of the attacks reported in the incident reports (83.7%). There
are only two exceptions: (1) There are some incident reports about
application-level attacks such as phishing and malware hosting that
we cannot detect with network signatures. (2) We only investigate
brute-force attacks on three remote communication protocols (SSH,
RDP, VNC). Therefore we miss brute-force attacks on other proto-
cols such as FTP.3 There are four incident reports labeled as “no
attacks” that are also covered by our detected attacks. We investi-
gated these attacks manually and conﬁrmed with the security team
that they are real attacks (on TCP SYN ﬂoods, SSH and RDP brute-
force attacks) but mislabeled. Our analysis has been leveraged by
the cloud security team towards improving attack detection, reduc-
ing time to detect, and identifying correlations across attack types.
Limitations of NetFlow. Due to coarse-grained sampling in the
NetFlow data collected for our study and the fact that NetFlow lacks
application-level information, we do not aim at identifying all the
attacks in the cloud. We may miss application-level attacks with-
out network-level signatures and those attacks that do not appear
3Some incident reports do not describe the protocols that are in-
volved in the brute-force attacks.

173in sampled NetFlow (e.g., HTTP Slowloris [24]). Instead, our goal
is to understand what we can learn about cloud attacks with low
overhead network-level information.

Although we just detect a subset of attacks due to the conser-
vative approach, it is still useful to understand the key characteris-
tics of these attacks to shed light on the effectiveness of commer-
cial attack-protection appliances, and the implications on designing
future attack detection and protection solutions. Studies [12, 22,
34] have shown that sampled NetFlow does not affect the detection
accuracy of ﬂood attacks but it may underestimate the number of
ﬂows. Therefore, the number of ﬂows we report should be viewed
as a lower bound on the number in the original trafﬁc.

4. ANALYSIS OF ATTACKS BY VIP

In our three-month trace data, there are on average 0.08% of VIPs
per day under inbound attacks and 0.11% of VIPs per day generat-
ing outbound attacks. In this section we investigate these VIPs to
understand the attack frequency per VIP, multi-vector attacks on
the same VIP, inbound and outbound attacks on the same VIP, and
attacks that involve multiple VIPs.

4.1 Attack frequency per VIP
Attack frequency per VIP: We count the number of attacks per
VIP per day (Figure 3a). Most VIPs experiencing attacks only in-
cur one attack incident during a day. Out of the 13K (VIP, day) pairs
experiencing inbound attacks, 53% of pairs experience only one at-
tack in a day. Out of 18K (VIP, day) pairs experiencing outbound
attacks, 44% generate only one attack in a day because the misbe-
having instances are aggressively shut down by the cloud security
team.

At the tail, a VIP can get 39 inbound attacks in a day. This is
a VIP hosting Media and HTTP services receiving frequent ﬂood
attacks (i.e., SYN, UDP, ICMP) with a median duration of 6 min-
utes and a median inter-arrival time of 64 minutes. For outbound
attacks, there are 0.05% of outbound (VIP, day) pairs generating
more than 100 attacks. We observed one VIP that generated more
than 144 outbound TCP SYN ﬂood attacks in a day to many web
servers in the Internet with a median duration of 1 minute and a me-
dian inter-arrival time of 10 minutes. This VIP did not receive any
inbound trafﬁc during a whole month in the NetFlow data indicat-
ing that this VIP does not likely host any legitimate cloud service
but it is only being used for malicious behavior.
VIPs with frequent and occasional attacks: We observed that
there are only a few VIPs getting more than 10 attacks (2% of the
inbound pairs and 5% of the outbound pairs). Therefore, we classify
the VIPs into two classes: those VIPs with no more than 10 attacks
per day and those with more than 10 attacks per day. Understanding
the VIPs under frequent attacks is important for operators to extract
the right attack signatures (e.g., popular attack sources) to protect
these VIPs from future attacks.

Figure 3 shows that for inbound attacks, there are more TDS,
port scan, and brute-force attacks for those VIPs with occasional
attacks than those with frequent attacks (26.6% vs. 0% for TDS,
20.1% vs. 1.84% for port scan, and 15.7% vs. 0.359% for brute-
force). It is natural for port scan and brute-force attacks to target
VIPs with occasional attacks because these attacks search widely
for vulnerabilities (e.g., open ports, weak passwords). TDS attacks
also interact more with VIPs with occasional attacks, which makes
TDS attacks harder to detect. Our further investigation shows that
these occasional attacks mainly target applications running proto-
cols like HTTP, HTTPS, DNS, SMTP, and SSH.

(a) Number of attacks per (VIP, day).

(b) Inbound attacks for VIPs with occasional/frequent attacks.

(c) Outbound attacks for VIPs with occasional/frequent attacks.

Figure 3: Attack characterization for VIPs with inbound and out-
bound attacks; the x-axis is on log-scale in the top ﬁgure.

VIPs under frequent attacks often experience relatively more TCP
SYN ﬂood attacks than those VIPs under occasional attacks (5.3%
vs. 1.4%). Our investigation shows that these frequent ﬂood attacks
often target several popular cloud services on these VIPs including
streaming applications, HTTP, HTTPS, and SSH.

Similarly, for outbound attacks, the VIPs with occasional attacks
experience more brute-force, TDS, and spam attacks than the VIPs
with frequent attacks (19.4% vs. 1.97% for brute-force, 12.8% vs.
0% for TDS, and 4.7% vs. 0.119% for spam). While attackers

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1 10 100 1000CDF of VIPs with attacksNum. of attacks per day for each VIP InboundOutbound 0 5 10 15 20 25 30SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanSec-ProtTDSPercentage of attacks overtotal inbound attacks (%)VIPs with occasional attacksVIPs with frequent attacks 0 5 10 15 20 25 30SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanSec-ProtTDSPercentage of attacks overtotal outbound attacks (%)VIPs with occasional attacksVIPs with frequent attacks174Figure 4: CDF of the percentage of VIP active time in attack.

may try to use free-trials or create fake accounts to launch them,
the attack activity is only short-lived because the anomalous VMs
are aggressively shut down by the cloud operators. It is challenging
to detect these attacks because they come from multiple VIPs in
the case of occasional attacks (e.g., spam) and they typically last
only a short time.
In contrast, those VIPs with frequent attacks
are often the sources for TCP SYN and UDP ﬂood attacks. For a
few cases, we manually veriﬁed that these VIPs have compromised
VMs, which may be sold in the underground economy [23, 49].
Fraction of VIP’s lifetime involved in inbound attacks: We in-
vestigated the fraction of the time a VIP is under inbound attacks or
generating outbound attacks compared to its total active time (i.e.,
the time that the VIP has active trafﬁc). Figure 4 shows that 50%
of VIPs experience inbound attacks for 0.2% of their active times.
These are occasional attacks that do not likely affect much of their
service. However, 3% of the VIPs receive inbound attack more than
50% of their operating time. Further investigation reveals that these
VIPs run media, web, mail, and database services. Cloud operators
need to effectively block these attacks to eliminate their impact on
cloud services.
Compromised VIPs vs. malicious VIPs for outbound attacks:
We also study the fraction of time a VIP generates outbound attacks
compared to its active time. Note that most of these compromised
VMs had weak passwords highlighting the need to enforce security
best practices such as conﬁguring cryptographically strong pass-
words. Figure 4 shows that 50% of VIPs generate outbound attacks
for 1.2% of their active times. These VIPs are likely legitimate
tenants that may have been compromised by attackers to generate
outbound attacks occasionally (see Section 4.2 for one such exam-
ple). In contrast, 8% of attack VIPs generate outbound attack for
more than 50% of their active times. These VIPs are likely to be
recruited mainly for attacks e.g., attackers may buy compromised
VMs in the cloud or leverage free trial accounts.
4.2 Attacks on the same VIP
Multi-vector attacks: We observe multiple types of attacks attack-
ing the same VIP or coming from the same VIP at the same time.
This is likely because a single malicious program tries to launch
multiple types of attacks to exploit the vulnerabilities of targets or
to exhaust target resources in different ways. We identify these at-
tacks if their start times to/from the same VIP differ less than ﬁve
minutes. We ﬁnd that 106 VIPs experience more than one type of
inbound attacks simultaneously, which accounts for 6.1% of the to-
tal inbound attacks. There are 74 VIPs that experience more than

Figure 5: Inbound and outbound attacks on the same VIP. We es-
timate the UDP throughput and the upper bound of the number of
RDP connections based on the 1 in 4096 sampling rate.

one type of outbound attacks simultaneously, which accounts for
0.83% of the total outbound attacks. Among these VIPs, 46 VIPs
are targets of multi-vector volume-based attacks (i.e., TCP SYN,
UDP, ICMP ﬂoods, and DNS reﬂection). There are 11 VIPs that
launch multi-vector outbound volume-based attacks.

A new observation we make about outbound attacks is that there
are 35 VIPs which launch brute-force attacks together with TCP
SYN and ICMP ﬂood attacks (which account for 22.3% of the out-
bound multi-vector attacks). This is likely a new attack pattern that
attackers ﬁnd effective in breaking Internet hosts.
Inbound and outbound attacks on the same VIP. There are also
several cases of simultaneous inbound and outbound attacks. Fig-
ure 5 shows one such case. A VIP from a partner subscription was
inactive (i.e., no trafﬁc) for a long time. Starting the second day,
the VIP started to receive inbound RDP brute-force attack for more
than a week. These brute-force attacks originated from 85 Internet
hosts, where 70.3% of attack packets are from three IP addresses
within a single resident AS in Asia. These brute-force attack had a
peak of estimated around 70 K ﬂows per minute with a few packets
sampled in each ﬂow. On the eighth day, the VIP started to gener-
ate outbound UDP ﬂoods against 491 external sites. The outbound
UDP attack had a peak volume at 23 Kpps, lasting for more than
two days. Detecting such attacks requires ﬁrst jointly analyzing the
inbound and outbound trafﬁc to identify the attack patterns of com-
promised VIPs, and then blocking their outbound trafﬁc.
4.3 Attacks on multiple VIPs

If attacks of the same type start on multiple VIPs simultaneously,
it is likely that these attacks are controlled by the same attacker.
We identify attacks on multiple VIPs if the difference of their start
times on different VIPs is less than ﬁve minutes.4

Figure 6 shows that most types of attacks are targeted by fewer
than 10 VIPs in the 99th percentile. We also observe that most types
of attacks are targeted at only one VIP in the median (not shown in
the ﬁgure). Inbound brute-force attacks have simultaneous attacks
on 53 VIPs in the 99th percentile and 66 VIPs in the peak. We
investigated the attacks at the tail and ﬁnd that there are two Internet
hosts from small cloud providers that start attacking 66 VIPs at the
same time, and move to other VIPs. During a single day, these two

4We choose ﬁve minutes because the ramp-up time is 1-3 minutes
for ﬂood attacks and the inactive time TI (deﬁned in Section 2) for
other attacks is larger than 10 minutes.

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2 5 10 20 50 100CDF of VIPs with attacksPercentage of VIP active time in attack (%)InboundOutbound 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 8002040608101214 0 5 10 15 20 25Estimated # of RDP connections (K)Estimated UDP throughput (Kpps)DayInbound Brute-forceOutbound UDP flood175Figure 6: The 99th percentile and the peak number of VIPs simul-
taneously involved in the same type of attacks.

Figure 7: Median and maximum aggregate throughput by attack
type; the y-axis is on log-scale.

Internet hosts attack more than 500 VIPs. These VIPs are located in
ﬁve data centers in the cloud, and they belong to 8 IP subnets with
different sizes (/17 to /21). The attacker scans through the entire
IP subnet with up to 114.5 Kpps attack trafﬁc per VIP. To prevent
such attacks, we need to correlate the trafﬁc to different VIPs and
coordinate their attack detection and mitigation.

For outbound attacks, UDP ﬂood, spam, brute-force, and SQL at-
tacks involve around 20 VIPs simultaneously in the 99th percentile.
In the peak, UDP ﬂood and brute-force attacks involve more than
40 VIPs simultaneously.
4.4 Cloud services under inbound attack

We now investigate the major types of cloud services under in-
bound attacks. We capture the NetFlow records for VIPs receiving
inbound attacks. We then ﬁlter all the attack trafﬁc from the trafﬁc
on the VIPs, and the remaining trafﬁc on the VIPs is mostly legiti-
mate trafﬁc. We use the destination port of inbound trafﬁc to infer
what type of applications and services are hosted on the VIPs. We
count the application type if the trafﬁc on the application port ex-
ceeds ten percent of its total trafﬁc. Table 3 shows the percentage of
VIPs with different types of cloud services that experience different
types of inbound attacks.

Web services (HTTP/HTTPS) are major services in the cloud
with 99% of the total trafﬁc. VIPs hosting these web services re-
ceive a wide range of attacks such as SYN ﬂoods, ICMP ﬂoods,
brute-force attacks, port scan, and TDS attacks. Web services re-
ceive the largest number of SYN attacks which aim to consume all
the available connections of application servers. 1.2% of the SYN
ﬂoods use source port 1024 and 3072, which are likely caused by
a bug from an old SYN ﬂood tool juno [9]. Blacklisting or rate-
limiting these ports can help mitigate SYN ﬂoods.

We also observe other non-ﬂood attacks targeting speciﬁc types
of services. For instance, there are 35.06% VIPs hosting RDP
servers with standard RDP port. The attackers often detect ac-
tive RDP ports and then generate brute-force attacks against the
server. TDS attacks mostly target VIPs running web services and
mail services for spam, malware spreading, and malicious advertis-
ing. There are 6.94% of VIPs under attack running web services
and 1.75% of VIPs running mail services.

5. ATTACK CHARACTERIZATION

We next investigate the characteristics of attacks to derive impli-
cations for the design of attack detection and prevention systems.

First, to quantify the cloud bandwidth capacity needed to defend
against attacks, we study the throughput of different types of at-
tacks. Second, to understand how fast the attack detection system
needs to react to attacks, we study the duration, ramp-up rate, and
inter-arrival times of different types of attacks.
5.1 Attack throughput
Throughput by attack type: Figure 7 shows the median and peak
aggregate throughput over the entire cloud for each type of attack
and all the attacks overall. We measure the attack throughput using
packets per second (pps) because the resources (CPU and memory)
used to prevent these attacks are often correlated to the trafﬁc rate.
The overall inbound attack throughput has a median of 595 Kpps
and a peak of 9.4 Mpps. The overall outbound attack throughput is
lower with a median of 662 Kpps and a peak of 2.25 Mpps. Com-
pared to the average throughput of legitimate trafﬁc (54.3 Mpps for
inbound and 49.7 Mpps for outbound), the median attack through-
put is about 1% of the total trafﬁc. These attacks can have a sig-
niﬁcant impact on both the cloud infrastructure (ﬁrewalls, load bal-
ancers) and services hosted in the cloud if we do not ﬁlter them at
the network edge.

We now study the peak volumes of individual attacks to under-
stand the resources we need to protect against them. TCP SYN
ﬂoods have a peak throughput of 1.7 Mpps for inbound and 184
Kpps for outbound. It is important to prevent these attacks timely
(e.g., using SYN cookies) before they exhaust many resources in
the cloud infrastructure such as load balancers and ﬁrewalls.

The peak throughput for inbound UDP ﬂoods is 9.2 Mpps while
that of outbound UDP ﬂoods is 1.6 Mpps. While these ﬂood attacks
aim to consume the cloud bandwidth or cause congestion to de-
grade service performance, the cloud networks are provisioned with
a high network capacity to defend against them [7, 14]. Given that
a software load balancer (SLB) can handle 300 Kpps per core [42]
for simple Layer 4 packet processing, in the worst case handling
inbound UDP ﬂoods may waste 31 extra cores in the data center
infrastructure. If we fail to do in-network ﬁltering of these UDP
ﬂoods, they would cost even more resources per packet in the VMs
which have more complex packet processing. However, detecting
some application-level attacks (e.g., brute-force, spam), endpoint
based approaches can leverage application semantics to better han-
dle them compared to in-network defense approaches.

We also observe large variations in attack volumes over time. For
inbound attacks, port scan has 1000x difference between the peak

 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanTDS99th(bar) and Peak(line) #VIPs with correlated attacksInboundOutbound 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1e+06 1e+07 1e+08SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanTDSOverallMedian(bar) and Peak(line)aggregate throughput(pkt/sec)InboundOutbound176Service(port)
RDP (3389)

HTTP (80,8080)
HTTPS (443)

SSH (22)

IP Encap (0)

SQL (1433, 3306)

SMTP (25)

Total
35.06
33.20
13.27
8.69
6.55
3.11
2.75

SYN
0.11
3.40
1.22

0

0.54

0

0.04

UDP
0.21
1.50
0.29
0.11
1.57

0

0.04

ICMP DNS
0.11
0.54
1.97
0.79
0.21
1.40
0.04
1.07

0

0.79
0.07
0.04

0
0

SPAM Brute-force
0.07
0.32
0.07

33.88
9.34
4.44
8.52
0.29
1.29
0.04

0

0.04
0.04
0.86

SQL
0.11
0.11
0.04

0
0

1.79

0

Portscan

0.32
13.63
8.05
0.18
0.39
0.11
0.04

TDS

0

6.94
0.14

0

0.04

0

1.75

Table 3: The percentage of total victim VIPs hosting different services involved with different inbound attacks; all numbers are in %.

Figure 8: Median and maximum attack throughput across VIPs; the
y-axis is on log-scale.

Figure 9: Median and 99th percentile of attack duration by attack
type; the y-axis is on log-scale.

and median volumes. This implies that it would incur high costs and
waste resources if we overprovision attack detection and mitigation
solutions in hardware boxes. In comparison, elastic approaches that
dynamically adjust resource usage over time may be a more cost-
effective and efﬁcient solution. The outbound attack throughput
variations are relatively smaller, but for TCP SYN ﬂoods and TDS
attacks, we still see a 20x-30x difference between the peak and me-
dian volumes.
Throughput per VIP: Today, cloud operators mostly focus on pre-
venting large-volume attacks that may affect the cloud infrastruc-
ture, but they rely on tenants to secure their own services [47].
However, many of the attacks we investigated are smaller attacks
targeting individual VIPs. Therefore, we study the peak attack
throughput for individual VIPs and characterize the throughput dif-
ferences across VIPs (Figure 8) to understand the resources indi-
vidual VIPs need to defend against attacks.

We observe that some VIPs experience a high peak volume of
attacks at a certain time (ranging from 100 pps to 8.7 Mpps). At
times, the per-VIP peak volume is even higher than the median
throughput for the entire cloud. For example, a single VIP can expe-
rience up to 8.7 Mpps inbound UDP ﬂoods. The per VIP inbound
TCP SYN ﬂood has a peak of 1.7 Mpps. We found one inbound
TCP SYN ﬂood that caused a CPU spike at the software load bal-
ancer (SLB) appliance and resulted in a restart of that appliance.
However, the trafﬁc from that device was quickly and automatically
shifted to other SLBs.

There are large differences in the throughput volumes across VIPs.
For example, for inbound brute-force attacks, the VIP having the
peak throughput has 361 times larger volume than the VIP with
the median value; for outbound brute-force attacks, this ratio is 75.
Therefore, it may become too expensive to over-provision hardware
security appliances for individual VIPs based on their maximum at-

tack volumes. In comparison, resource management mechanisms
that multiplex the attack protection resources across VIPs are likely
to be more cost-effective.

Finally, we observe that for volume-based attacks (TCP SYN,
UDP, ICMP, and DNS reﬂections), the peak volume of inbound at-
tacks is 13 to 238 times higher than that of outbound. This is caused
by the differences in attack resources and targets between the Inter-
net and the cloud. For inbound attacks, there are more resources to
leverage in the Internet (e.g., botnets, easily compromised personal
machines) to launch high-volume attacks. These attacks also need
to have high volumes to break the VIPs in the cloud, which have
plenty of bandwidth and CPU resources. In contrast, outbound at-
tacks can only leverage a few VMs in the cloud, because it is hard
to compromise a large number of VMs or create multiple fake ac-
counts to get many free VIPs.
5.2 Attack duration and inter-arrival time
Attack duration: Figure 9 shows that both inbound and outbound
attacks have short duration with a median value within 10 minutes.
This is consistent with other studies of Internet attacks [38, 40].
Interestingly, port scan attacks have a median duration within one
minute for both inbound and outbound (but they can last for 100
minutes at the 99th percentile). There are several reasons that an at-
tacker may launch short-duration attacks towards or from the cloud:
(1) Shorter attacks are harder to be detected by cloud operators; (2)
an attacker may attack one target for a short time and if not suc-
cessful move quickly to another target. As a result, it is important
to detect such short duration attacks in a timely fashion.

At the 99th percentile, most attacks have a duration longer than
80 minutes or even for days. For example, the TCP SYN ﬂood
attack lasts for 85 minutes at the 99th percentile. This is shorter
than the previous study of Internet attacks [40], which observed

 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1e+06 1e+07SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanTDSMedian(bar) and Maximum(line)peak throughput (pkt/sec)InboundOutbound1 min10 min1 hour1 day1 week1 monthSYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanTDSMedian(bar) and 99th(line)durationInboundOutbound177Figure 10: Median and 99th percentile of attack inter-arrival time
by attack type; the y-axis is on log-scale.

(a) Percentage of inbound attacks in each AS type.

that 2.4% of the attacks take more than ﬁve hours. This could be
due to better security support in the cloud.

DNS reﬂection attacks last longer than others in both inbound
and outbound directions. These attacks can sustain for a long time
before being detected because they leverage many DNS resolvers
simultaneously and each resolver receives relatively low query rate.
Thus, it is hard to detect these attacks.
Ramp-up time: For volume-based attacks, we calculate the ramp-
up time of an attack from its start time to the time when the packet
rate grows to 90% of its peak. We observe a median ramp up time of
2-3 minutes for inbound attacks and 1 minute for outbound attacks.
Today’s ﬂood detection solutions take about 5 minutes to detect the
attacks [17, 48], and thus they are not fast enough to fully eliminate
the ﬂood attacks before they ramp up to affect the target with their
peak strengths.
Inter-arrival time: We measure the inter-arrival time as the inter-
val between the start times of two consecutive attacks to/from the
same VIP. Figure 10 shows that most types of attacks have a median
inter-arrival time of hundreds of minutes. The outbound TCP SYN
and UDP ﬂood attacks are shorter than inbound (about 25 minutes
vs. 100 minutes). This indicates that malicious VIPs launch pe-
riodic attacks frequently. Attack protection systems can leverage
such repeated attacks to identify and tune the right signatures for
ﬁltering attack trafﬁc.

We identify two types of UDP ﬂood attacks based on the corre-
lations of inter-arrival time and peak attack size. 81% of the attacks
have a median peak size with 8 Kpps but with large inter-arrival
time (a median of 226 min). The rest 19% of the attacks have a
median peak size with 457 Kpps, but with short inter-arrival time
(a median of 95 min). The ﬁrst type of small-scale, occasional at-
tacks are relatively hard to distinguish from normal trafﬁc and thus
they are hard to mitigate without signiﬁcant collateral damage. In
contrast, the large-scale, frequent attacks require the cloud security
operators to provision more resources to detect their trafﬁc signa-
tures and mitigate them.

6.

INTERNET AS ANALYSIS

In this section we investigate the types of Internet ASes that are
commonly involved in attacks to the cloud and that are under at-
tacks from the cloud.

(b) Average of percentage of inbound attacks per AS in each AS type.

Figure 11: Different types of ASes generating inbound attacks.

6.1 Inbound attacks
Are source IPs spoofed? We investigate whether the Internet IPs
of inbound attacks are spoofed to understand the effectiveness of
blacklisting on preventing different inbound attacks. Similar to
prior work [40], we leverage the Anderson-Darling test (A2) [43] to
determine if the IP addresses of an attack are uniformly distributed
(i.e., an attack has spoofed IPs if A2 value is above 0.05). We ob-
serve that 67.1% of the TCP SYN ﬂoods have spoofed IPs. This is
contrary to the study in 2006 [38] which observed that most ﬂood
attacks are not spoofed.
AS classiﬁcation: We ﬁrst remove those spoofed IPs and then map
the IP addresses of inbound attack sources and outbound attack tar-
gets to AS numbers using Quova [11]. We use AS taxonomy reposi-
tory [27] to identify AS types, which include large ISPs, small ISPs,
customer networks, universities (EDU), Internet exchange points
(IXP), and network information centers (NIC). We further classify
big cloud (i.e., Google, Microsoft, Amazon), small cloud (i.e., web
hosting services), and mobile ASes based on the AS descriptions.
We count the number of attack incidents of different types for each
AS class if any of its IP is involved in the attack.

Figure 11a shows the distribution of attacks across different types
of ISPs. We observe that small ISPs and customer networks gen-
erate 25.4% and 15.9% of the attacks, respectively. For instance,
an ISP in Asia contributed to 3.53% of the total attack packets.
This is probably because these local or regional ISPs have relatively
less security expertise and weak defense systems, and thus they are
more likely to be compromised and leveraged by attackers.

When we calculate the average of percentage of attacks per AS
(Figure 11b), we observe that there are more attacks per AS from
big cloud and IXP. Individual ASes in small ISPs and customer net-
works do not generate many attacks on average.

 1 10 100 1000 10000SYNUDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-ForceSQLPortScanTDSMedian ininter-arrival time (min)InboundOutbound 0 5 10 15 20 25 30BigCloudSmallCloudMobileLargeISPSmallISPCustomerEDUIXPNICPercentage(%) 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3BigCloudSmallCloudMobileLargeISPSmallISPCustomerEDUIXPNICPercentage (%)178Figure 12: Percentage of inbound attacks from big clouds and mo-
bile ASes in each attack type.

(a) Percentage of inbound DNS or spam attacks in each AS type.

Attacks from big clouds: Figure 12 shows the distribution of at-
tack types that originated from big clouds. UDP ﬂoods, SQL injec-
tions, and TDS attacks are the majority types. This is probably due
to the availability of a large set of resources in big clouds to gen-
erate a high trafﬁc volume and a large number of connections. In
fact, big clouds contribute to 35% of TDS attacks with just 0.21%
of TDS IPs.
Attacks from mobile and wireless ASes: With the growth of mo-
bile devices, attackers can try to compromise and exploit their re-
sources for malicious activities. Given the relatively weaker soft-
ware model in mobile devices compared to desktop PCs and the
wide deployment of third-party apps on them, they are more likely
to be compromised by malware for launching attacks. Users may
also jailbreak the security restrictions and install tools (e.g., An-
DOSid or mobile LOIC) to participate in botnet activities [10]. In
fact, there are 2.1% of the inbound attack trafﬁc from mobile net-
works.

Figure 12 shows that mobile networks mainly generate UDP ﬂoods,

DNS reﬂections, and brute-force attacks. These attacks are harder
to mitigate because simple source-based blacklisting does not work
well for mobile devices. This is because most mobile devices are
often located behind a NAT. While NAT may become less common
with IPv6 adoption, there would be more ephemeral addresses.
Origins of DNS attacks: Figure 13a shows that the cloud we stud-
ied received a similar number of DNS attacks from all types of
ASes. Figure 13b shows that if we count per AS attacks, there are
more DNS attacks from IXPs. Our further investigation shows that
each DNS attack involved a median value of only 17 unique DNS
resolvers in the NetFlow records.
Origins of spam: Figure 13a shows that spam attacks are mainly
from large cloud, small ISPs, and customer networks. For exam-
ple, 81.0% of the spam packets are from Amazon Web Services
(AWS) [2] in Singapore.5 However, each individual small ISP or
customer network does not generate many attacks as indicated by
the number of per AS attacks shown in Figure 13b. This indicates
that it is easier for attackers to leverage the free trial accounts in
large clouds, the end hosts in small ISPs, and customer networks
to generate spams. Prior study of spams in the Internet [46] shows
many spams come from network information centers (NIC), but we
observed only a single attack from NICs in our data.
Geolocation distribution of inbound attacks: Figure 14a shows
the geographical distribution of inbound attack sources. The in-
bound attack sources are spread mainly across places in Europe,
Eastern Asia, and North America. Speciﬁcally, there is one AS in

5We did not validate these spam attacks with AWS.

(b) Average percentage of inbound DNS or spam attacks per AS in
each AS type.

Figure 13: Different types of ASes generating inbound DNS and
SPAM attacks.

(a) Geolocation distribution of inbound attack sources.

(b) Geolocation distribution of outbound attack targets.

Figure 14: Attack geolocation distribution.

 0 10 20 30 40 50UDPICMPDNSSPAMBrute-forceSQLPortscanTDSPercentage (%)BigCloudMobile 0 10 20 30 40 50BigCloudSmallCloudMobileLargeISPSmallISPCustomerEDUIXPNICPercentage (%)DNSSPAM 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5BigCloudSmallCloudMobileLargeISPSmallISPCustomerEDUIXPNICPercentage (%)DNSSPAM 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40Percentage of total inbound attack (%) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40Percentage of total outbound attack (%)179(a) Percentage of outbound attacks in each AS type.

(b) Average percentage of outbound attacks per AS in each AS type.

Figure 15: Different types of ASes targeted by outbound attacks.

Spain involved with more than 35% of the total inbound attacks.
It mainly generated UDP ﬂood, TDS and SQL attacks. There are
ASes from the west coast of North America that are involved with
more than 20% of the total inbound attacks.
6.2 Outbound attacks
Are outbound attacks clustered? Unlike Internet ﬂoods which
often target a single host [48], we observe outbound UDP ﬂood
target a median of 8 hosts, while TCP SYN ﬂoods often target a
median of 25 Internet hosts just in our sampled NetFlow data. This
means attackers often use cloud resources to attack a group of hosts
instead of individual IPs. We count the number of unique victim
IPs of outbound attacks in each AS to understand if the victims are
clustered on particular ASes. We ﬁnd that 80% of the attacks target
hosts in a single AS.

While prior work has shown that a small number of ASes are
involved in a signiﬁcant fraction of attacks in ISP networks [38]
and distributed intrusion detection system [50], we show that cloud-
related attack incidents are widely spread across many ASes. Top
10 ASes are targets of 8.9% of the attacks; top 100 ASes are targets
of 16.3% of the attacks. However, there is a small portion of at-
tacks responsible for the major attack trafﬁc. For instance, 40% of
the outbound attack packets were directed from three VIPs towards
a small cloud AS in Romania, which offers web hosting, online
gaming, and VPN services.
AS classes of outbound attacks: Figure 15 shows that 42% of out-
bound attacks are against services in big clouds. Most of these at-
tacks are SQL injection and TDS attacks. Small ISPs and customer
networks face 25% and 13% of the outbound attacks (Figure 15a),
but individual ASes do not generate many attacks (less than 0.01%
of the total outbound attacks per AS) (Figure 15b). Small ISPs and
customer networks are the major target for brute-force attacks and
spam. This is probably because these networks often lack strong se-

Figure 16: Top Internet applications under outbound attacks.

curity support. For example, 23.6% of the outbound DNS reﬂection
attack packets are sent to an ISP in France. It is therefore important
to coordinate security measures across the cloud infrastructure and
these networks to protect against these attacks.

There are only a few brute-force attacks against mobile networks
(1.4%). This may be because mobile devices are often behind a
NAT preventing them from unsolicited connections, which makes
it harder for attacks to get through.
Internet applications under attack: To understand the Internet
applications under attacks, we investigate the destination port of
outbound trafﬁc coming from the VIPs generating outbound attacks
(Figure 16). We ﬁnd that most of the outbound attacks target web
services (HTTP/HTTPS together form 64.5% of the attack VIPs in-
volved with outbound attacks). For example, 69% of the outbound
UDP ﬂoods use port 80 as the destination port targeting HTTP ser-
vices. The other popular target services are SQL, SMTP, and SSH.
Geolocation distribution of outbound attacks: Outbound attack
targets are mainly spread across places in Europe and North Amer-
ica (Figure 14b). There are less outbound attack targets than in-
bound attack sources in Eastern Asia. The same AS in Spain we
discussed in inbound attacks also receives more than 35% of out-
bound attacks (mainly with brute-force, TDS, and SQL attacks).

7. EXISTING SECURITY PRACTICES

In this section we discuss how existing cloud security solutions

handle the types of attacks observed in our study.
Inbound TCP SYN, UDP, ICMP ﬂoods, DNS reﬂection attacks:
Cloud VMs are only accessible through virtual IPs (VIPs). Trafﬁc
towards VIPs is routed through a load-balancing infrastructure [42].
At the infrastructure, the cloud can monitor, detect and mitigate
ﬂood attacks (e.g., using SYN cookies, rate limiting, and connec-
tion limits) to help ensure that such attacks do not impact cus-
tomer VM instances [7]. The tenants can also leverage scale-out
(e.g., adding more VMs on demand) or scale-up (e.g., deploying
resource-rich VMs) techniques to raise the bar for attacks [4].

There are multiple in-built mechanisms in cloud systems to safe-
guard tenants. For example, the hypervisor that hosts guest VMs in
the cloud is neither directly addressable internally by other tenants
nor it is externally addressable. Additional ﬁlters are put in place
to block broadcast and multicast trafﬁc, with the exception of what
is needed to maintain DHCP leases. Inside the VMs, tenants can
further enable web server add-ons that protect against certain DoS
attacks [41]. For example, for TCP SYN ﬂooding attacks, a security
rule can be speciﬁed to track signiﬁcant deviations from the norm
in terms of the number of half-open TCP sessions, and then drop
any further TCP SYN packets from speciﬁed sources [5].

 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45BigCloudSmallCloudMobileLargeISPSmallISPCustomerEDUIXPNICPercentage(%) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7BigCloudSmallCloudMobileLargeISPSmallISPCustomerEDUIXPNICPercentage (%) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100HTTPHTTPSSQLSMTPSSHRDPVNC#VIPs180Port scan: Unauthorized port scans are often viewed as a violation
of cloud use policy and they are blocked by the cloud provider [3].
Port scans are likely to have limited effectiveness because, by de-
fault, all the inbound ports on VMs are closed except the ones
opened by tenants; a tenant can author a service deﬁnition ﬁle that
contains the internal endpoints that should be opened in service
VMs and what roles can communicate with them [8]. Tenants can
also use security groups or ﬁrewalls to further block unauthorized
trafﬁc [41].
Other inbound attacks: Some cloud providers choose not to ac-
tively block network trafﬁc affecting individual tenants because the
infrastructure does not interpret the expected behavior of customer
applications. Instead, these cloud systems allow tenants to use ﬁre-
wall proxy devices such as Web Application Firewalls (WAFs) that
terminate and forward trafﬁc to endpoints running in a VM. Ten-
ants can also use network ACLs or VLANs to prevent packets from
certain IP addresses from reaching VMs [7].

Cloud providers can also leverage high-level signals emitted from
workloads running on the cloud from customer accounts. One such
signal is the number of open ports. Legitimate customers aim to
minimize the susceptibility of their applications running in the cloud
to any external attacks, and hence deploy services usually with a
limited number of open ports (e.g., HTTP port 80). However, com-
promised accounts or VMs may perform a variety of anomalous
activities such as running a Botnet controller or torrent services on
multiple open ports. The cloud security team monitors such activi-
ties and aggressively shuts down any misbehaving tenant VMs.
Outbound attacks: To mitigate outbound attacks, the most impor-
tant step is to identify fraudulent VMs when a tenant sets up a sub-
scription. In the cloud, several anti-fraud techniques are used such
as credit card validation, computing the estimated geographical dis-
tance from the IP address used for login to the billing address and
ensuring it is within reasonable bounds, and determining whether
the email address of the purchaser is from a free email provider.

Note that attackers can also exploit vulnerabilities in VMs of le-
gitimate customers.
If an attack is successful, the compromised
VMs can then be used by attackers for malicious activity e.g., to
send large amounts of unsolicited mail (spam). The cloud provider
can enforce limits on how many emails a VM can send as well as
prevent SMTP open relay, which can be used to spread spam [5].

8. RELATED WORK

This paper presented one of the ﬁrst large-scale studies to inves-
tigate the prevalence of network-based attacks in the cloud. We
compare our work with related work on detecting and understand-
ing Internet-based attacks.
Attack detection methods: Previous works have used NetFlow
logs to understand DDoS attacks and trafﬁc anomalies [38, 22, 36,
35] in ISP networks. Our work takes a similar approach to under-
stand a broader set of attacks in the cloud. Most previous stud-
ies on application-level attacks leverage analysis of the application
content (e.g., spam [15, 25], SQL injection [18], SSH [32]). Our
work shows that it is possible to detect some of these attacks by
leveraging network-level signatures such as volumes, spread, TCP
ﬂags, and communication patterns. In fact, previous works have
also shown that application-level attacks (e.g., spam) have strong
network-level signatures [46]. We validate our network-based de-
tection by comparing the detected attacks against the security ap-
pliance alerts and incident reports. Although network-based de-
tection may not capture all types of application-level attacks (e.g.,
malware), they are more pragmatic to implement in today’s cloud
monitoring infrastructure.

Attack characterization: There is a large body of work on char-
acterizing Internet-based attacks. Most prior efforts (e.g., [10, 13,
17, 40, 46, 51]) focus on one or a few types of attacks in the In-
ternet. Given the importance of cloud services in today’s Internet,
understanding the attacks from/to the cloud is critical. Our study in-
vestigates a wide diversity of inbound and outbound attacks in the
cloud. We differentiate DDoS attacks based on their protocols (TCP
SYN, UDP, DNS reﬂection), and show that other types of attacks
(e.g., brute-force, port scans, and TDS) also need cloud operator’s
attention. Moreover, we show the detailed characteristics of attacks
in the cloud such as the cloud services affected by the attacks, the
Internet origins and targets, and the intensity and frequency of these
attacks. These results can provide guidelines for future design of at-
tack detection and mitigation systems for the cloud.

9. CONCLUSION

We investigated the prevalence of network-based attacks both on
and off the cloud. We performed the ﬁrst measurement study of
the characteristics of a wide range of cloud attacks that vary in
complexity, intensity, duration and distribution. Our study shows
a strong evidence of increasing scale, attack volume, and sophisti-
cation of these attacks. Our results have been leveraged by the cloud
security team towards identifying correlations and improving miti-
gations for different attack types. We hope that this study motivates
future research towards designing attack detection and mitigation
systems for the cloud. In future work, we plan to extend our mea-
surement study to analyze application level attacks, compare across
attack categories and leverage packet traces for deeper analysis.

Acknowledgment
We thank Ramesh Govindan, Cormac Herley, Jelena Mirkovic, Vivek
Narassaya, Jitu Padhye, Jay Stokes, Alec Wolman, and the anony-
mous reviewers for their insightful feedback and suggestions. This
work is supported in part by the NSF grants CNS-1423505, CNS-
1413972, and DHS-D15PC00184.

10. REFERENCES
[1] http:

//www.everestgrp.com/2015-04-40-billion-
global-cloud-services-market-expected-
to-grow-27-percent-per-annum-for-next-3-
years-press-release-17218.html.

[2] Amazon web services. http://aws.amazon.com/.
[3] Amazon Web Services: Overview of Security Processes.
https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/
Security/AWS%20Security%20Whitepaper.pdf.

[4] AWS Best Practices for DDoS Resiliency.

https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/
DDoS_White_Paper_June2015.pdf.

[5] AWS Security Best Practices.

https://d0.awsstatic.com/whitepapers/
aws-security-best-practices.pdf.

[6] http://nmap.org/book/man-port-scanning-techniques.html.
[7] Microsoft Azure Network Security Whitepaper.

http://blogs.msdn.com/b/azuresecurity/
archive/2015/03/03/microsoft-azure-
network-security-whitepaper-version-3-
is-now-available.aspx.

[8] https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/

library/azure/ee758711.aspx.

[9] juno.c. http://goo.gl/i1Qodc, 2013.

181[10] Q4 2013 global ddos attack report.

http://goo.gl/lIyRmK, 2013.

[11] Quova. http://www.quova.com, 2013.
[12] S. Ali, I. U. Haq, S. Rizvi, N. Rasheed, U. Sarfraz, S. A.
Khayam, and F. Mirza. On Mitigating Sampling-induced
Accuracy Loss in Trafﬁc Anomaly Detection Systems. ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 2010.

[13] M. Allman, V. Paxson, and J. Terrell. A Brief History of

Scanning. In IMC, 2007.

[14] Andrew Marshall, Michael Howard, Grant Bugher, Brian
Harden. Security Best Practices For Developing Windows
Azure Applications. http://download.microsoft.
com/documents/uk/enterprise/88_security_
best_practices_for_developing_windows_
azure_applicat.pdf.

[15] I. Androutsopoulos, J. Koutsias, K. V. Chandrinos,

G. Paliouras, and C. D. Spyropoulos. An Evaluation of Naive
Bayesian Anti-Spam Filtering. Proceedings of the workshop
on Machine Learning in the New Information Age, 11th
European Conference on Machine Learning, 2000.
[16] C. Anley. Advanced SQL Injection in SQL Server

Applications. In Next Generation Security Software Ltd,
2002.

[17] Arbor Networks. Insight into the global threat landscape.

http://goo.gl/15oOx3, February 2013.

[18] S. Bandhakavi, P. Bisht, P. Madhusudan, and V. N.

Venkatakrishnan. CANDID: Preventing SQL injection
attacks using dynamic candidate evaluations. ACM CCS,
2007.

[19] M. Basseville and I. Nikiforov. Detection of Abrupt Changes:

Theory and Application. Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs,
1993.

[20] Bloomberg. Sony Network Breach Shows Amazon Clould’s

Appeal for Hackers. http://goo.gl/3WiAaj, 2011.
[21] G. Booth, A. Soknacki, and A. Somayaji. Cloud Security:

Attacks and Current Defenses. In ASIA, 2013.

[22] D. Brauckhoff, B. Tellenbach, A. Wagner, M. May, and

A. Lakhina. Impact of packet sampling on anomaly detection
metrics. In IMC, 2006.

[23] J. Caballero, C. Grier, C. Kreibich, and V. Paxson. Measuring

pay-per-install: The commoditization of malware
distribution. In USENIX Conference on Security, 2011.

[24] E. Cambiaso, G. Papaleo, and M. Aiello. Taxonomy of Slow

DoS Attacks to Web Applications. In TCNDSS. Springer,
2012.

[25] X. Carreras and L. Marquez. Boosting Trees for Anti-Spam

Email Filtering. Proceedings of RANLP, 2001.

[26] R. Chaiken, B. Jenkins, P.-A. Larson, B. Ramsey, D. Shakib,
S. Weaver, and J. Zhou. SCOPE: Easy and Efﬁcient Parallel
Processing of Massive Data Sets. VLDB’08.

[27] X. Dimitropoulos, D. Krioukov, G. Riley, and k. claffy.

Revealing the Autonomous System Taxonomy: The Machine
Learning Approach. In Passive and Active Network
Measurement Workshop (PAM), 2006.

[28] N. R. Draper, H. Smith, and E. Pownell. Applied regression

analysis. Wiley New York, 1966.

[29] Google. Malware Distribution by Autonomous System.

http://goo.gl/mZQeG4, 2013.

[30] C. Grier, L. Ballard, et al. Manufacturing Compromise: The

Emergence of Exploit-As-A-Service. In CCS, 2012.

[31] L. Hellemons. Flow-based detection of ssh intrusion

attempts. Scanning, 2012.

[32] M. Javed and V. Paxson. Detecting Stealthy, Distributed SSH

Brute-forcing. CCS, 2013.

[33] C. Kanich, N. Weaver, D. McCoy, T. Halvorson, C. Kreibich,

K. Levchenko, V. Paxson, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage.
Show Me the Money: Characterizing Spam-Advertised
Revenue. In USENIX SEC, 2011.

[34] R. Kawahara, K. Ishibashi, T. Mori, N. Kamiyama,

S. Harada, and S. Asano. Detection accuracy of network
anomalies using sampled ﬂow statistics. In GLOBECOM ’07.
IEEE.

[35] A. Lakhina, M. Crovella, and C. Diot. Diagnosing

network-wide trafﬁc anomalies. In SIGCOMM, 2004.

[36] A. Lakhina, M. Crovella, and C. Diot. Mining anomalies

using trafﬁc feature distributions. In SIGCOMM, 2005.

[37] Z. Li, S. Alrwais, Y. Xie, F. Yu, and X. Wang. Finding the

Linchpins of the Dark Web: A Study on Topologically
Dedicated Hosts on Malicious Web Infrastructures. In
Security and Privacy (SP), IEEE Symposium on, 2013.

[38] Z. M. Mao, V. Sekar, O. Spatscheck, J. van der Merwe, and
R. Vasudevan. Analyzing large DDoS attacks using multiple
data sources. In SIGCOMM Workshop on Large-scale Attack
Defense, 2006.

[39] J. Mirkovic and P. Reiher. A Taxonomy of DDoS Attack and

DDoS Defense Mechanisms. SIGCOMM CCR, 2004.

[40] D. Moore, C. Shannon, D. J. Brown, G. M. Voelker, and
S. Savage. Inferring Internet Denial-Of-Service Activity.
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 2006.

[41] C. Nelson. Best practices to protect your azure deployment

against “cloud drive-by” attacks.
http://blogs.msdn.com/b/azuresecurity/
archive/2015/07/05/best-practices-to-
protect-your-azure-deployment-against-
cloud-drive-by-attacks.aspx.

[42] P. Patel, D. Bansal, L. Yuan, A. Murthy, A. Greenberg, D. A.

Maltz, R. Kern, H. Kumar, M. Zikos, H. Wu, et al. Ananta:
Cloud Scale Load Balancing. In ACM SIGCOMM, 2013.

[43] V. Paxson, G. Almes, J. Mahdavi, and M. Mathis. Framework

for IP performance metrics. In RFC 2330, 1998.
[44] A. Pitsillidis, C. Kanich, et al. Taster’s Choice: A

Comparative Analysis of Spam Feeds. In IMC, 2012.

[45] R. Potharaju, N. Jain, and C. Nita-Rotaru. Juggling the

jigsaw: Towards automated problem inference from network
trouble tickets. In NSDI’13.

[46] A. Ramachandran and N. Feamster. Understanding the

network-level behavior of spammers. In SIGCOMM, 2006.

[47] B. Ridgway. Security best practices for windows azure

solutions. Azure Manual, 2014.

[48] V. Sekar, N. G. Dufﬁeld, O. Spatscheck, J. E. van der Merwe,

and H. Zhang. LADS: Large-scale automated DDoS
detection system. In USENIX ATC, 2006.

[49] B. Stone-Gross, T. Holz, G. Stringhini, and G. Vigna. The

underground economy of spam: A botmaster’s perspective of
coordinating large-scale spam campaigns. USENIX Workshop
on Large-Scale Exploits and Emergent Threats (LEET), 2011.

[50] V. Yegneswaran, P. Barford, and S. Jha. Global intrusion
detection in the domino overlay system. In NDSS, 2004.

[51] V. Yegneswaran, P. Barford, and J. Ullrich. Internet

intrusions: Global characteristics and prevalence. In ACM
SIGMETRICS 2003.

182