WHOIS Lost in Translation: (Mis)Understanding
Domain Name Expiration and Re-Registration

Tobias Lauinger

Northeastern University

toby@ccs.neu.edu

Kaan Onarlioglu

Northeastern University
onarliog@ccs.neu.edu

Abdelberi Chaabane
Northeastern University
3abdou@ccs.neu.edu

William Robertson

Northeastern University

wkr@ccs.neu.edu

Engin Kirda

Northeastern University

ek@ccs.neu.edu

ABSTRACT
Internet domain names expire when not renewed and
may be claimed by a new owner. To date, despite exist-
ing work on abuses of residual trust after domain own-
ership changes, it is not well understood how often and
how fast re-registrations occur, and the underlying pro-
cesses are often over-simpliﬁed in scientiﬁc literature,
leading to a potential bias in those studies. While in
principle registration data is available in Whois data-
bases, scalability issues and data ambiguities make re-
registrations a challenging subject of study in practice.
By focusing on domains about to be deleted, we were
able to track 7.4 M com, net, org, biz and name domains
over up to ten months to gather data for a survival ana-
lysis of re-registrations. Our results show that expira-
tion processes may vary, and that many re-registrations
happen soon after deletion, especially for older domains.
We also discuss intricacies of Whois data to aid in
avoiding potential pitfalls, as fast domain ownership
changes combined with hidden domain states may pose
challenges to operational and research communities.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Internet domain names are typically assigned on a
ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served basis. Registrations are valid for
a limited time period and must be renewed regularly
in order to remain active. When an owner fails to do
so, they can still rescue their domain during a short
redemption period, but ultimately it will be deleted and
can be re-registered by any interested party.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
IMC ’16, November 14–16, Santa Monica, CA, USA.
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4526-2/16/11. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2987443.2987463

In this paper, we aim to quantify the phenomenon of
Internet domain expiration and re-registration. While
it is known that re-registrations are sometimes done for
malicious purposes [8, 13, 15, 17], in general it is not well
understood what fraction of expired domains is even-
tually re-registered, and what the temporal aspects of
re-registrations look like. Furthermore, the expiration
process of domains is often over-simpliﬁed in the literat-
ure; registrars have a considerable degree of freedom for
their implementations. We aim to shed light on how the
process varies in practice, and how it could potentially
bias studies that do not account for these subtleties.

An important challenge to answering these questions
is that historical domain registration data is diﬃcult
to obtain in a scalable way.
Information about cur-
rently registered domains is publicly available through
the Whois protocol, but there is no complete archive of
prior registrations. Furthermore, as researchers previ-
ously pointed out [16], Whois is designed for occasional
manual use rather than bulk access. The data format
of the text-based protocol can be inconsistent, and rate
limits restrict the number of possible lookups. Even
worse, we show in this paper that there are various am-
biguities in Whois data that can make it quite complex
to correctly infer the state of a domain.

We built a system that discovers domains about to
be deleted in DNS zone ﬁles and tracks their Whois re-
cords through the various states of expiration and po-
tentially re-registration. Overall, we track 7.4 M com,
net, org, biz and name domains from August 2015 to
June 2016. We carefully ﬁlter the collected data to
account for various Whois intricacies and perform a
survival analysis of 6.5 M expired domains with about
16.5 % observed re-registrations.

Our ﬁndings show higher rates of re-registration for
larger zones and older domains; for instance, around
20 % of expired com domains are re-registered within
300 days. Furthermore, there appears to be signiﬁcant
competition over re-registrations since many of them oc-
cur in spikes around the earliest availability. The latter

247Figure 1: Domain states with transitions due to EPP commands issued by the registrar, or automatic transitions
if none is issued before the deadline. If a domain is not deleted or renewed by the registrar before the expiration
date, the registry automatically renews it for a year. *Additional states for renew and domain transfers omitted.

date does not follow the same pattern for all domains,
which contradicts the common misconception of a ﬁxed
deletion delay. On a diﬀerent level, our results also in-
clude several lessons about working with Whois data
that we learned the hard way. Fast domain ownership
changes combined with the diﬃculty of distinguishing
the Whois records of a recently renewed domain from
one that is about to be deleted, for instance, are po-
tential pitfalls when identifying origins of malicious be-
haviour or surveying the domain ecosystem. We hope
that this work will raise awareness for these issues.
2. BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
Names in the Domain Name System (DNS) are struc-
tured hierarchically. Top-level domains (TLDs) such as
com or net are created by the Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) and then del-
egated for day-to-day operation to a registry such as
Verisign. Each registry maintains a directory of the
registered second-level names and their authoritative
name servers, called a DNS zone. Registries delegate
billing and customer support to ICANN-accredited re-
gistrars, companies such as GoDaddy or Gandi, which
sell domain names to registrants or domain owners.

Domain Lifecycle: Domains are registered for a
period of one or more years.
If a domain is not re-
newed before its expiration date, it goes through a series
of phases that permit late renewals before the domain
is ultimately deleted. Registrars manage the state of
the domains they sponsor by connecting to the regis-
tries’ systems using the Extensible Provisioning Pro-
tocol (EPP) [7]. Figure 1 shows a subset of possible
domain states [3], and how EPP commands cause trans-
itions between them [1, 2, 4, 5, 6]. The most common
case for domain expiration, and typically the only case
mentioned in related work, is a 45-day auto-renew grace
period followed by a 30-day redemption period and a 5-
day pending delete state [13, 15] – a total of 80 days
between the expiration date and the earliest opportun-
ity for re-registration. The corresponding path in the
ﬁgure is highlighted with bold arrows. In practice, how-

ever, registrars have a considerable degree of freedom
when implementing this state machine.

In fact, a domain enters the auto-renew state only if
it is not renewed or deleted by the registrar before its
expiration date. The registry automatically renews do-
mains past their expiration date for one year and grants
the registrar up to 45 days to cancel the renewal without
becoming liable for the renewal fee. During this time,
at the discretion of the registrar, the domain may still
be active in the DNS zone and continue to resolve.

When a domain is marked for deletion by the regis-
trar, it is deactivated in the zone and stops resolving.
The redemption period gives the registrant a ﬁnal 30 day
chance to restore the domain. If not restored, the do-
main is moved into pending delete, and after 5 days, it
can be re-registered on a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served basis.
The Whois Protocol: Registries maintain data-
bases of registration information for currently registered
domains, including creation and expiration dates, the
ID of the respective registrar, and currently active EPP
status code ﬂags [3]. These databases are accessible to
the public via the Whois protocol, e.g. to look up the
owner of a domain or check availability for registration.
Whois servers are optimised for manual investigations;
they allow lookups of one domain at a time, are heavily
rate limited, and contain data about only the current
registration in a semi-structured, textual format that is
not always consistent [16]. While commercial archives of
Whois data do exist, the available granularity of data
can vary from domain to domain, and the companies do
not disclose when and how they collect the data, which
all makes these archives ill suited for a systematic study
of domain expiration and re-registration.

Related Work: Prior research in the area of domain
registrations includes the work on registration intent by
Halvorson et al. [10, 11, 12], and a study of registration
abuses such as domain tasting [9]. Schlamp et al. [17]
describe an attack to take over protected resources by
re-registering the expired domains of email addresses.
Attackers have also been reported to re-register expired
domains that built up a good reputation [8, 13, 15].

AddGrace PeriodRegisteredAuto-RenewGrace PeriodRedemption Perioddeleteafter 5 daysrenew*renew*after 45 daysdeleterestorePendingDeleteafter 5 daysafter 30 daysdeletecreateexpirationpast date ofDomainNot Registered248Zone

Size

Added

Removed

com

net

org

biz

name

123.0 M 15.6 M 10.9 M 2.3 M 168.5 k

111.2 k
77
0.09 % 0.07 % 0.07 % 0.05 % 0.05 %

11.4 k

7.4 k

1.2 k

84.0 k
121
0.07 % 0.07 % 0.06 % 0.08 % 0.07 %

10.6 k

6.7 k

1.8 k

Sample, max.

25 k

6 k
29.6 % 56.7 %

2 k
30 %

2 k
100 %

200
100 %

Table 1: Median zone size with additions/removals per
day (08/2015 – 05/2016) and max. daily sample size.

Two works present a more systematic examination of
domain re-registrations: Hao et al. [13] investigate char-
acteristic registration patterns of spam domains and
ﬁnd that among re-registered domains, those later used
for spamming tend to be registered faster than non-
malicious domains. Lever et al. [15] analyse the ma-
liciousness of domains before and after re-registration
with a focus on when malicious behaviour occurs, not
when or why a domain is re-registered.

Liu et al. [16] propose a machine learning approach
to parse the responses of registrar-level Whois servers,
which do not have a standardised format. Our work
is orthogonal in the sense that we describe how certain
domain states may not be visible in a single observation.
3. METHODOLOGY

To measure the re-registration behaviour of domains,
we need to know which domains are about to expire,
and we need to track how they progress through the ex-
piration states, are deleted, and possibly re-registered.
3.1 Expiring Domain Discovery

It is important to ﬁnd domain expiration candidates
early so that we can extract their original creation and
expiration dates before they are deleted. Since some
DNS zones are very large, it is ineﬃcient to discover
domains approaching their expiration date through ex-
haustive crawling of Whois records; e.g., it took Liu et
al. multiple months to crawl the com zone [16].

As a more targeted approach, and similar to prior
work [15], we consider as expiration candidates the do-
mains removed from the DNS zone. Under their ICANN
agreements, registries grant researchers access to daily
snapshots of their DNS zone ﬁles, that is, the data used
to run the zone’s name servers—a list of all second-
level domain names that have at least one authoritat-
ive name server conﬁgured. We download these zone
ﬁles daily from the registries of com, net, org, biz and
name; Table 1 shows the median of the overall zone size
as well as the entries added and removed relative to the
previous day. As discussed in Section 2, expiring names
are removed from the DNS zone when they enter re-
demption period (or earlier); however, they can also be
removed for various other reasons, such as misconﬁgur-
ation. Since Whois records remain active throughout

the 35 days of the redemption and pending delete peri-
ods until the ﬁnal deletion of the domain, we can extract
all required metadata and verify the domain’s status.
3.2 Domain Tracking

To keep track of domains as they evolve through vari-
ous states of expiration and potentially re-registration,
we built a system that schedules periodic Whois quer-
ies for domains removed from the DNS zone. After a
ﬁrst lookup immediately upon removal, future lookups
are scheduled regularly until the results of the lookup in-
dicate either that the domain will not expire in the near
future (e.g., it was renewed), or when a re-registration
is observed. We stop tracking such domains to reduce
the number of lookups needed to run our measurement.
For domains found to be re-registered, if the query
date was only ﬁve days or less after the creation date,
as a precaution we schedule them for another query six
days later to rule out the possibility of domain tasting:
Some registries allow registrars to delete a new domain
up to ﬁve days after creation (the add grace period in
Figure 1) and do not charge for the domain. Domain
tasting was found to be responsible for 76 % of com re-
gistrations in 2008, with each registration lasting for an
average of 3.4 days, and is said to be used by domain
speculators to test for free how much traﬃc a domain re-
ceives [9]. Since we cannot reliably observe all instances
of domain tasting at a reasonable query frequency, we
remove the cases that we do observe from our data set.
That is, we consider only re-registrations that were act-
ive for at least six days.

Our experiment lasted a total of 10 months. We inser-
ted domains removed from the zone ﬁle each day during
the ﬁrst seven months and kept tracking these domains
for three more months, giving us between three and ten
months of history for each domain. To keep the number
of Whois lookups manageable, we performed random
sampling of the domains removed from the zone ﬁles
up to the daily limits outlined in Table 1. This al-
lowed us to handle all domains removed from smaller
zones and almost 30 % of even the largest com zone. We
scheduled Whois lookups at a bi-weekly frequency so
that we could observe each domains’ records in diﬀer-
ent expiration states while not overburdening our sys-
tem. Overall, we collected nearly 86.2 M Whois records
from 7.4 M domains in the ﬁve zones (Table 2). Since
most registries did not publish any query rate limits,
we conservatively performed one lookup every 2 s per
IP address (20 s for org, below the published limit of
15 s). Our crawlers always received valid Whois re-
sponses without being slowed down or banned.

Unfortunately, when starting our measurement, we
were not aware of the many intricacies and hidden do-
main states of the Whois protocol that we describe in
Section 3.3. Our analysis revealed that the scheduler
had sometimes incorrectly inferred domain states, not
the least because some states can be inferred correctly
only in retrospect but not at the time of the observation.

249To account for this, at the end of our measurement we
looked up every domain name ever tracked by our sys-
tem so that we have at least two Whois observations for
each domain. While two lookups are suﬃcient to meas-
ure re-registrations, the intermediate data points were
necessary in many cases to understand in detail how
domain expiration works, and how to ﬁlter and post-
process the dataset as described in Section 3.4. For
future measurement studies, we recommend looking up
each domain only twice several months apart, or using
periodic but unconditional lookups.
3.3 Whois Data Intricacies

When we ﬁrst looked at the collected data, we no-
ticed a number of unexpected scenarios, such as de-
creasing expiration dates and seemingly overlapping re-
gistrations for the same domain. Upon further investig-
ation, we found that these cases resulted from domain
states that were not explicit in the Whois records. We
provide an overview of frequent issues that may be of
interest to other researchers working with Whois data.
Increasing and Decreasing Expiration Dates:
When a registrar does not renew or delete a domain be-
fore its expiration date, the registry automatically ex-
tends the registration by one year by moving the domain
into the auto-renew state. However, since intended re-
newals typically occur before the expiration date, most
automatically renewed domains will in fact be deleted
during the 45-day grace period and enter redemption
period, during which the expiration date may or may
not decrease by one year to the previous value.

Inconsistent and Incomplete Flag Use: While
EPP deﬁnes status codes [3] corresponding to the do-
main states in Figure 1, not all of these possible ﬂags
are used in practice, and their use varies by registry
and registrar. Out of the ﬁve registries in our dataset,
only org had the autoRenewPeriod ﬂag set. For the
other registries, it is not possible to tell whether the ex-
piration date shown in the Whois record is the actual
expiration date or the provisionally extended one—see,
e.g., the 2003 discussion on DNSO’s registrars mailing
list.1 Note that even for org, a single observation dur-
ing the redemption or pending delete periods does not
reveal whether the year of the expiration date is cor-
rect since it often remains at the increased value and
only a prior observation of the autoRenewPeriod ﬂag
could help in disambiguating the data. As another ex-
ample for the inconsistent use of ﬂags, com and net use
redemptionPeriod and pendingDelete in a mutually ex-
clusive way, whereas org sets both ﬂags simultaneously
during redemption period.

Delayed Updates: We sometimes observed brief
delays between events that we expected to co-occur,
such as the beginning of the auto-renew period and the
increase of the expiration date. This might be due to

1http://www.dnso.org/clubpublic/registrars/Arc02/
msg00143.html

Figure 2: Removal of com/org domains from the DNS
zone relative to their expiration date. The shaded areas
correspond to removals 0 – 46 days after expiration; the
left area appears shifted one year due to “auto-renew.”

some changes being made by the registrar while others
are done by the registry, as alluded to in the mailing list
discussion above. Due to these ambiguities, the state of
a domain can often be inferred only in retrospect by
making use of multiple Whois observations.
3.4 Data Filtering and Post-Processing

Our data encompasses 7.4 M domains from ﬁve zones,
all with at least two Whois observations between three
and ten months apart (see Table 2). Although all in-
stances of domain tasting re-registrations were already
detected and removed during the scheduling phase, we
still need to account for several other artefacts of the
data before we can measure re-registration delays.

As the ﬁrst step, we remove domains that did not
expire during our measurement (or were renewed), that
is, domains for which all Whois observations contain
the same creation date and no observation of a “do-
main not found” response—these domains were likely
removed from the DNS zone for reasons other than ex-
piration. Next, we remove domains having a “domain
not found” response as the ﬁrst lookup result. In all like-
lihood, these are not expirations, but deletions during
the add grace period (i.e., domain tasting registrations)
because they do not go through the redemption period
and Whois records become unavailable immediately.

Our next set of ﬁlters is based on the time diﬀer-
ence between the ﬁrst Whois lookup, that is, the time
the domain was removed from the DNS zone, and the
expiration date found in the corresponding Whois re-
cord. Since we are interested in expiring domains, they
should not disappear from the DNS zone before the ex-
piration date, and they should not be removed more
than 45 + 1 days after their expiration date, which is
the maximum duration of grace periods before the re-
demption period (we add one day to account for possible
delays in our pipeline). Since registries may automatic-
ally increase the expiration date of expired domains by

−400−300−200−10001002001st query timestamp ¡ expiration date (days)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF (domains)orgcom250Zone

All Domains

No Expiration Observed (unrelated removal from zone)
Not Found in 1st Lookup (domain already deleted)
Manually Deleted (>1 y before expiration date)
Atypically Late Removal from Zone File
Manually Del. (<1 y)/Late Removal (auto-renew/+1 y)

Expired Domains (regular)
Expired Domains (auto-renew/+1 y)

Domains with Observed Re-Registration
Domains without Re-Registration (censored)

com

net

org

biz

name

5,342,999

1,268,722

425,994

377,299

25,251

323,542
168,593
16,139
12,414
140,520

4,001,538
680,253

845,210
3,836,581

71,689
26,598
3,621
2,537
40,198

973,735
150,344

159,876
964,203

22,180
4,074
3,181
9
15,219

4,716
376,615

46,233
335,098

22,559
9,569
1,046
277
11,789

330,594
1,465

28,010
304,049

2,226
5,091
326
1
1,877

10,176
5,554

798
14,932

Table 2: Domains in our sample: Subset removed for lack of (typical) expiration, and data used in survival analysis.

one year (Section 3.3), the aforementioned interval can
also occur shifted by 365 days. Figure 2 visualises the
removal/expiration date time diﬀerence for our org do-
mains; we retain the domains in the right shaded inter-
val as “regular” expirations, and those in the left shaded
interval as “auto-renew” expirations. The vast majority
of expiring org domains already have their expiration
date increased by one year, whereas the opposite is true
for ﬁrst observations of com, net and biz domains.

We remove the domains in the three remaining inter-
vals. The leftmost interval corresponds to domains that
were deleted more than one year before their expiration
date; these are likely domains that were manually and
purposefully deleted. We remove these domains since
their deletion time appears unrelated to their expiration
date, and because our analysis of re-registration delays
is based on the assumption that domains remain active
until the expiration date. The rightmost interval con-
tains domains that remained in the DNS zone for longer
than expected (one example entered redemption period
more than 2.5 months after the expiration date). We
exclude these atypical cases since they may correspond
to registrar errors or special handling of domains under
dispute or suspicion of maliciousness. The middle inter-
val is a combination of the two aforementioned cases,
that is, domains manually deleted less than one year
before the expiration date, and “auto-renew” domains
removed from the DNS zone later than expected.

After ﬁltering, we are left with between 15.7 k (name)
and 4.68 M domains (com). For the re-registration ana-
lysis, we subtract one year from the expiration date of
domains in the “auto-renew” expiration interval, and we
use only the ﬁrst and last observed Whois response per
domain. The result of the last lookup is either “domain
not found,” in which case no re-registration has been
observed, or it is a valid record containing the creation
date of the new re-registration instance.

3.5 Limitations

Since we seed our system with domains that are re-
moved from zone ﬁles, our study does not include do-
mains that are registered but do not appear in a DNS
zone, such as when the domain is not meant to resolve.

Our study excludes manually deleted domains since
the deletion may be unrelated to the expiration date,
which in turn is the basis for our re-registration analysis.
Similarly, we analyse only domains that go through
the redemption and pending delete periods, which guar-
antees that they are removed from the DNS zone. We
cannot characterise private domain sales or auctions
that result in ownership transfers rather than expira-
tion, deletion and re-registration cycles because such
transfers may keep the domain active in the DNS zone
and retain the original creation date in the Whois data.
Note however that we can quantify re-registrations no
matter if a domain re-appears in the DNS zone or not
since we use Whois signals for detection.

4. RE-REGISTRATION ANALYSIS

In our measurement, we added samples of domains re-
moved from DNS zones each day for seven months and
tracked them until the end of our measurement after
ten months. From a statistical point of view, our re-
registration data is right-censored because the observa-
tion period is not the same for all domains. A common
way to deal with such data is survival analysis, for which
we use the Kaplan-Meier (KM) estimator [14].

The survival function S(t) corresponds to the prob-
ability that an expired domain has not yet been re-
registered after time t. We deﬁne the random variable
T to represent the time between a domain’s expiration
date and the next creation date. Note that under this
deﬁnition, the re-registration delay T includes a time
span during which the domain has already expired but
is not yet available for re-registration because it is still
in the auto-renew, redemption or pending delete state.
We include expiration delays in our deﬁnition because
it is diﬃcult to predict when a domain will be available
for re-registration, as we will show below. With F (t)
the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of T , the
survival function is deﬁned as follows:

S(t) = P r[T > t] = 1 − F (t)

The KM estimator makes no assumption about the dis-
tribution of re-registration delays. Its input is the set of
observed re-registration delays as deﬁned above and, for

251In fact, the ﬁrst clearly visible increase of domain
re-registrations begins around day 35. Although these
represent only a tiny fraction overall (0.1 % of com do-
mains are re-registered before day 40), they again con-
tradict the common misconception of an 80-day deletion
delay. Based on our understanding of domain states
(Figure 1), domains re-registered around day 35 likely
never entered the auto-renew grace period but were in-
stead deleted by the registrar on the expiration date,
which made them go directly into redemption period.
This seems to be a matter of how registrars implement
EPP state transitions on their end. When looking at the
prior registrars of domains re-registered before 50 days,
we ﬁnd that there are only relatively few of them, and
around half or more of the re-registrations of their prior
domains occur within 50 days, which suggests that those
state transitions are regular behaviour for these regis-
trars. Taken together, our ﬁndings indicate that there is
no general pattern to predict domain deletion delays on
a per-zone basis; if at all, it may exist on a per-registrar
basis at best. (Our data counts over 2, 000 registrars).
Re-Registrations by Prior Age: As a ﬁrst step to-
ward predicting which expired domains are more likely
to be re-registered than others, we break down the sur-
vival function for com by the age of the domain before
it expired. Figure 4 illustrates that domains that were
previously registered for longer time spans are more
likely to be re-registered than short-lived domains. A
prior registration period of nine or more years, for in-
stance, makes a domain about three times more likely
to be re-registered than a domain that was not renewed
after its initial year. Longer prior registration periods
may indicate that such a domain was more desirable
to keep, and it may have established a good online
reputation that could be valuable not only to regular
businesses or Internet users looking to establish a pres-
ence under a newly available, coveted name, but also
to spammers [13] or other miscreants aiming to exploit
residual trust [15, 17], and more generally to domain
speculators hoping to resell for a proﬁt, or to monetise
the domain not with content, but advertising [18]. Note
however that age does not necessarily mean popularity;
fewer than 200 domains in our sample appear on lists
of popular Internet hosts such as the Alexa Top 1 M.

5. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

When we initially set out to quantify re-registration
probabilities and delays, we expected this to be a relat-
ively straight-forward measurement task, with Whois
data collection at scale being the biggest anticipated
challenge. As we found out, however, domain names
can and do expire in various diﬀerent ways that are not
fully explored in relevant literature; variations in how
sponsoring registrars implement expiration ﬂows make
it challenging to predict the time between expiration
date and deletion. Furthermore, some domain states are
not visible in Whois data, and it is easy to draw incor-

Figure 3: Survival plot for domains not re-registered
(95 % conﬁdence intervals). Smaller zones also have a
smaller fraction of re-registrations.

the censored part of our data, the set of non-registration
time spans (i.e., expiration date until the most recent
“domain not found” Whois observation). Our survival
analysis is based on observed re-registrations of over
1 M domains in ﬁve zones, and almost 5.5 M domains
not re-registered during the measurement (Table 2).

Overall Re-Registration Delay: Figure 3 shows
the survival functions for the ﬁve zones. Those with a
smaller size (see Table 1) also exhibit a smaller rate of
re-registrations for expired domains. The most popu-
lar zone, com, has a re-registration rate of about 20 %
after 300 days. An interesting observation is that on
our time scale, domains that are re-registered tend to
be re-registered early. All zones exhibit a spike of re-
registrations just before day 80; for com, days 0 – 80
see about as many re-registrations as days 80 – 350.
Eighty days correspond to the maximum deletion delay
after expiration (45 days in auto-renew, 30 in redemp-
tion period and 5 in pending delete). Therefore, we
hypothesise that these re-registrations illustrate regis-
trants taking over expired domains as soon as possible.
Earliest Re-Registrations: Immediate re-registra-
tion of deleted domains is the core business of so-called
drop-catch services. For a fee, they attempt to “catch”
a domain automatically as soon as it “drops.” Being
fully automated, and with multiple companies in direct
competition, we assume that domain registrations by
drop-catch services happen as early as possible, and we
can use those registrations to gain better insights into
the expiration behaviour of domains.

Many online explanations of domain expiration beha-
viour would mislead the reader into believing that the
delay is always 80 days after the expiration date. How-
ever, the steepest increase in re-registrations we observe
in our data is on days 78 and 79. The reason is that
the auto-renew grace period has a maximum duration
of 45 days, after which the registrar becomes liable for
a year’s worth of domain renewal fees. To avoid the fee,
registrars can delete a domain at any point during the
45 days, and they appear to do so a few days early.

050100150200250300350Timeline (days)0.800.850.900.951.00Frac. not re-registered after t daysnamebizorgnetcom252unthemed-pages/appendix-7-2011-07-01-en.

[6] .ORG Agreement Appendix 7: Functional

Speciﬁcations. https:
//www.icann.org/resources/unthemed-pages/
org-appx-07-html-2013-09-12-en.

[7] Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP), RFC
5730. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5730, 2009.

[8] N. Chachra, D. McCoy, S. Savage, and G. M.
Voelker. Empirically Characterizing Domain
Abuse and the Revenue Impact of Blacklisting. In
Workshop on the Economics of Information
Security, 2014.

[9] S. E. Coull, A. M. White, T.-F. Yen, F. Monrose,

and M. K. Reiter. Understanding Domain
Registration Abuses. Computers and Security,
31(7):806–815, 2012.

[10] T. Halvorson, M. F. Der, I. Foster, S. Savage,

L. K. Saul, and G. M. Voelker. From .academy to
.zone: An analysis of the new TLD land rush. In
ACM Internet Measurement Conference, 2015.

[11] T. Halvorson, K. Levchenko, S. Savage, and G. M.

Voelker. XXXtortion? Inferring Registration
Intent in the .XXX TLD. In World Wide Web
Conference, 2014.

[12] T. Halvorson, J. Szurdi, G. Maier, M. Felegyh´azi,

C. Kreibich, N. Weaver, K. Levchenko, and
V. Paxson. The BIZ Top-Level Domain: Ten
Years Later. In Passive and Active Measurement
Conference, 2012.

[13] S. Hao, M. Thomas, V. Paxson, N. Feamster,

C. Kreibich, C. Grier, and S. Hollenbeck.
Understanding the Domain Registration Behavior
of Spammers. In ACM Internet Measurement
Conference, 2013.

[14] E. L. Kaplan and P. Meier. Nonparametric
Estimation from Incomplete Observations.
Journal of the American Statistical Association,
53(282):457–481, 1958.

[15] C. Lever, R. J. Walls, Y. Nadji, D. Dagon,

P. McDaniel, and M. Antonakakis. Domain-Z: 28
Registrations Later – Measuring the Exploitation
of Residual Trust in Domains. In IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2016.

[16] S. Liu, I. Foster, S. Savage, G. M. Voelker, and

L. K. Saul. Who is .com? Learning to Parse
WHOIS Records. In ACM Internet Measurement
Conference, 2015.

[17] J. Schlamp, J. Gustafsson, M. W¨ahlisch, T. C.
Schmidt, and G. Carle. The Abandoned Side of
the Internet: Hijacking Internet Resources When
Domain Names Expire. In International Workshop
on Traﬃc Monitoring and Analysis, 2015.
[18] T. Vissers, W. Joosen, and N. Nikiforakis.

Parking Sensors: Analyzing and Detecting Parked
Domains. In Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium, 2015.

Figure 4: Survival plot for com domains not re-regis-
tered, based on prior registration length (95 % conﬁd-
ence intervals invisible). Older domains are more likely
to be re-registered.

rect conclusions from a single observation. For instance,
a domain with an expiration date months ahead may
very well cease to exist a few weeks after the observation
due to domain tasting or a retroactively canceled auto-
matic renewal. These very common patterns can cause
statistics about the remaining lifetime of domains to be
overestimated, or make a distribution showing the age
of registered domains in a zone include domains that,
strictly speaking, do not exist at observation time.

Ambiguities in Whois responses make the data dif-
ﬁcult to work with not only in large-scale studies like
ours, but also for manual, one-time investigations. We
believe that any successor to the Whois protocol should
aim to enforce a well-deﬁned, common format that is
consistently used across registries and registrars, and
make domain states more explicit. A public audit trail
of domain state modiﬁcations, for instance, could satisfy
this requirement and would also better support invest-
igations of past (mis)behaviour of domains.

Acknowledgements: Our work was made possible
by the support of Farsight Security (DNSDB) and Se-
cure Business Austria as well as the help and advice of
Colleen Mulligan and our shepherd Alastair Beresford.
6. REFERENCES
[1] .BIZ Agreement Appendix 7: Functional

Speciﬁcations. https://www.icann.org/resources/
unthemed-pages/biz-appx-07-html-2013-09-13-en.
[2] .com Registry Agreement Appendix 7: Functional

and Performance Speciﬁcations.
https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/
appendix-07-2012-12-07-en.

[3] EPP Status Codes. https://icann.org/epp.
[4] .name Registry Agreement Appendix 7:

Functional Speciﬁcations. https://www.icann.org/
resources/pages/appendix-07-2013-07-08-en.

[5] .NET Registry Agreement Appendix 7:

Functional and Performance Speciﬁcations.
https://www.icann.org/resources/

050100150200250300350Timeline (days)0.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.951.00Frac. not re-registered after t days1 year2-4 years5-8 years≥ 9 years253