Location-restricted Services Access Control Leveraging

Pinpoint Waveforming

Tao Wang†, Yao Liu†, Qingqi Pei‡, and Tao Hou†

{taow@mail, yliu@cse, taohou@mail}.usf.edu, qqpei@mail.xidian.edu.cn

†University of South Florida, Tampa, FL

‡Xidian University, Xi’an, China

ABSTRACT
We propose a novel wireless technique named pinpoint wave-
forming to achieve the location-restricted service access con-
trol, i.e., providing wireless services to users at eligible lo-
cations only. The proposed system is inspired by the fact
that when two identical wireless signals arrive at a receiver
simultaneously, they will constructively interfere with each
other to form a boosted signal whose amplitude is twice of
that of an individual signal. As such, the location-restricted
service access control can be achieved through transmitting
at a weak power, so that receivers at undesired locations
(where the constructive interference vanishes), will experi-
ence a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and hence a high
bit error rate that retards the correct decoding of received
messages. At the desired location (where the constructive
interference happens), the receiver obtains a boosted SNR
that enables the correct message decoding.

To solve the diﬃculty of determining an appropriate trans-
mit power, we propose to entangle the original transmit sig-
nals with jamming signals of opposite phase. The jamming
signals can signiﬁcantly reduce the SNR at the undesired re-
ceivers but cancel each other at the desired receiver to cause
no impact. With the jamming entanglement, the transmit
power can be any value speciﬁed by the system administra-
tor. To enable the jamming entanglement, we create the
channel calibration technique that allows the synchroniza-
tion of transmit signals at the desired location. We develop
a prototype system using the Universal Software Deﬁned
Radio Peripherals (USRPs). The evaluation results show
that the receiver at the desired location obtains a through-
put ranging between 0.9 and 0.93, whereas an eavesdropper
that is 0.3 meter away from a desired location has a through-
put approximately equal to 0.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.1 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Network
Architecture and Design—wireless communication

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CCS’15, October 12–16, 2015, Denver, Colorado, USA.
c(cid:13) 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3832-5/15/10 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2810103.2813709.

Keywords
Location-restricted service; Pinpoint waveforming; MIMO
1.

INTRODUCTION

With the rapid development of wireless technologies, it is
highly desirable to enforce location-restricted service access
control that provides wireless services to users at eligible
locations only. For example,

• To focus limited resources on legitimate customers,
restaurants and coﬀee shops may oﬀer internet access
to wireless users only when they are sitting at tables.
• Companies may allow wireless network access only to
employees working in selected oﬃce cubicles, in order
to comply export control policies.

• In wireless surveillance system, the monitor cameras
may need to deliver their video streams to speciﬁc users
at speciﬁc locations, e.g, personnel in the security con-
trol room, to reduce the privacy leakage.

Surprisingly, existing techniques fail to achieve this goal
in a secure and eﬃcient manner. We discuss existing tech-
niques and their shortcomings below.

• User account control: The service access control
can be achieved by creating individual accounts for
each user, where a user can obtain the wireless service
by providing a correct username and password. How-
ever, this may be insuﬃcient for secure access control
to location-restricted services, as a user might share
the account information with friends. This method
also requires active account administration which is
impractical for location-restricted services with high
turnover such as in the restaurant example.

• MAC address binding: MAC address binding is a
variant of the user account control. A wireless router
allows the access of wireless users only when they have
valid Media Access Control (MAC) addresses. Never-
theless, the users may share their MAC addresses with
others who are not at the desired locations.

• Beamforming techniques: Beamforming techniques
(e.g., [1, 2]) use antenna arrays for directional signal
transmission or reception. These techniques may be
utilized to send the service data to wireless users at
the speciﬁed directions, but again they cannot enable
the location-restricted service access control, because

292Figure 1: Con-
structive inter-
ference of
two
waves.

Figure 2: A naive idea

all other wireless users are able to receive the service
data as long as they reside in the signal coverage range
of the antenna arrays.

• Localization plus encryption: Service providers
may use existing localization algorithms like time-of-
arrival (TOA) and angle-of-arrival (AOA) to ﬁnd the
locations of wireless users, and encrypt the service data
so that users at target locations can use appropriate
keys to decrypt it. However, cryptographic encryp-
tion may cause a signiﬁcant latency, and thus fail to
support common services like high-speed downloading
and online video watching. Also, like the password
case, with compromised cryptographic keys, undesired
receivers at other locations can still obtain the service.

In this paper, we would like to develop a novel and practi-
cal wireless system that achieves the aforementioned location-
restricted service access control to support emerging wireless
requirements. Our basic idea is to leverage the eﬀect of con-
structive interference as shown in Figure 1. The crests of two
identical waves meet at the same point, and then both waves
form a new wave with the same shape but the magnitude is
boosted to twice of that of an individual wave.

This observation inspires us to propose a new wireless
system that pinpoints wireless services to users at eligible
locations only.
Intuitively, we can set up a naive system
as illustrated in Figure 2. The service provider concurrently
sends identical service packets (e.g., down-link internet data)
using two (or more) transmitters. Assume an ideal synchro-
nization algorithm is in use and these packets arrive at the
receiver at the service location simultaneously. Thus, they
constructively interfere with each other to form a boosted
received packet whose magnitude is twice of that of an indi-
vidual packet.

In practice, a small time shift among the packet arrival
times may exist due to synchronization imperfections. At
the service location, such a time shift should be less than a
certain threshold, so that the constructive interference still
exists and the receiver is able to decode the received packet.
To prevent leaking the service to undesired receivers, in-
cluding receivers close to the service provider, an intuitive
way is to transmit at a weak power so that receivers at un-
desired locations (where the constructive interference van-
ishes) will experience a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and
hence a high bit error rate that retards the correct decod-
ing of the received messages. At the desired location (where
the constructive interference happens), the receiver obtains
a boosted SNR that enables the correct message decoding.
However, how to select an appropriate signal transmit
power becomes a challenging question. If the transmit power

is too small, the constructive interference may not incur
enough power to allow receivers at the service location to
correctly decode the received data. On the other hand, if
the transmit power is too large, receivers outside of the ser-
vice location may recognize the signal and thus can decode
the received data. To avoid the diﬃculty of determining the
transmit power, we propose to entangle the original transmit
signals with jamming signals, so that the jamming signals
can signiﬁcantly reduce the SNR at the undesired receivers
but cancel each other at the desired receiver to cause no
impact.

Speciﬁcally, for a pair of transmitters T1 and T2, we gen-
erate a pair of jamming signals j1 and j2, where j1 and j2
are of the opposite phase (i.e., j1 = −j2). The transmitter
T1 then adds the jamming signal j1 to its transmit signal.
Similarly, T2 adds the jamming signal j2 to its transmit sig-
nal. Finally, T1 and T2 send s + j1 and s + j2 to the wireless
channel respectively, where s is the original signal to be sent
by both transmitters. At the service location, due to the
constructive interference, the original signal s boosts, but
the jamming signals j1 and j2 cancel each other (they are of
opposite phase). At other locations where constructive in-
terference vanishes, j1 and j2 do not cancel each other, and
instead they serve as jamming signals to decrease the SNR
at receivers at these locations. Consequently, the receivers
will experience a service of bad quality.

We point out that in an ideal free space propagation envi-
ronment, constructive interference of electromagnetic waves
occur whenever the phase diﬀerence between the waves is a
multiple of a half period. This means there exist multiple
locations, where the constructive interference may happen.
However, in a practical wireless environment, because wire-
less channels are uncorrelated, every a half wavelength, the
original transmit signals sent by diﬀerent transmitters may
experience diﬀerent channel distortions when they propagate
to the receiver. Therefore, at the locations where the con-
structive interference should happen, signals received from
diﬀerent transmitters show diﬀerent shapes due to distor-
tions and thus achieve a poor constructive interference. To
solve this problem and pinpoint the service to the desired
location only, we propose a channel synchronization tech-
nique that compensates the channel distortion at the desired
constructive interference location, so that received signals
exhibit the same wave shape when they arrive at this loca-
tion. The channel synchronization technique is customized
for the desired location only. For other constructive interfer-
ence locations, the arrived signals still show diﬀerent shapes,
thereby yielding the same low SNR as other non-constructive
interference locations as proved in Section 6.2.

We name the proposed system as the pinpoint waveform-
ing system. Figure 2 is a naive example of this system.
Nevertheless, to transform this naive system to a real-world
system, non-trivial eﬀort should be done to answer the fol-
lowing basic questions:

• Synchronization: How can the system achieve prop-
agation synchronization, so that signals sent by multi-
ple transmitters can arrive at the service location con-
currently? Moreover, how can we achieve the afore-
mentioned channel synchronization?

• Tolerable time shift: Signals sent by transmitters
are expected to arrive at the desired receiver simulta-
neously to form the constructive interference, but in

Wave1Wave2Resultant wave11011101…...…...293practice a small time shift among them might exist
due to the processing delay and synchronization im-
perfections. What is the tolerable time shift that can
still enable the constructive interference at the desired
receiver?

• Service area size: The service area is deﬁned as the
neighborhood area, within which the constructive in-
terference happens and a receiver can receive the ser-
vice data with a good quality. It should be hard for re-
ceivers outside of the service area to obtain the service
data. To ensure the accurate service access control, a
critical question is how large the service area is.

In this paper, we demonstrate the feasibility of the pin-
point waveforming system by answering the above essential
concerns about synchronization, tolerable time shift, and
service area size. We implement a prototype of the pinpoint
waveforming system on top of the Universal Software Ra-
dio Peripherals (USRPs), and evaluate the performance of
the prototype system through comprehensive experiments.
Our results show that the receiver obtains a high throughput
ranging between 0.90 and 0.93 when it is at the desired loca-
tion, but this throughput dramatically decreases when the
receiver is moved from the desired location. In particular, at
a distance of 0.3 meter, the throughput of the eavesdropper
approaches to 0.

2. SYNCHRONIZATION

We discuss synchronization ﬁrst, because synchronization
is the basis for the proposed pinpoint waveforming system
to achieve the constructive interference of original signals
and the cancelation of the jamming signals. Synchronization
includes three components, and they are clock synchroniza-
tion, propagation synchronization, and channel synchroniza-
tion.
2.1 Clock and Propagation Synchronization
Clock synchronization deals with the discrepancy of the
clocks of multiple transmitters, so that they transmit ser-
vice packets at the same time. In the proposed system, all
transmitters are connected to the same service provider, and
thereby their clocks are roughly the same.

The distances between the receiver and each transmitter
may be diﬀerent. Accordingly, signals sent by these trans-
mitters may arrive at the receiver at diﬀerent time even if
they are sent at the same time. To compensate the propaga-
tion diﬀerence, the service provider needs to perform propa-
gation synchronization through adjusting the transmit time
of each transmitter. Propagation synchronization has been
extensively studied in the context of wireless sensor networks
(e.g., [3, 4]). In a traditional way, the receiver broadcasts a
beacon signal, and the transmitter (service provider) ad-
justs each transmitter’s transmit time based on beacon ar-
rival time recorded at this transmitter [5]. Since transmitter
clocks are inherently the same, the proposed system is com-
patible with the traditional synchronization approach.

Note that after clock and propagation synchronization,
due to the processing delay and synchronization imperfec-
tions, the time shift will still exist between the signal arrival
times. In section 5, we show the impact of the time shift
and the maximum time shift that can be tolerated by the
system.

Figure 3: Without chan-
nel synchronization

Figure 4: With channel
synchronization

2.2 Channel Synchronization

The impact of channel eﬀect cannot be neglected. The
signals sent by diﬀerent transmitters may undergo diﬀerent
channel eﬀects. When the signals arrive at the receiver,
their shapes accordingly exhibit diﬀerent distortions, and
thus the constructive interference may diminish due to the
wave shape discrepancy. The transmit (jamming) signals
should be calibrated so that they have the same (reverse)
shapes when they arrive at the receiver.

Figure 3 shows a real measured example of the channel im-
pact without the channel synchronization. Two transmitters
are separated by a certain distance to result in uncorrelated
channels (i.e., 0.75 meter for a 2.4 GHz channel). The re-
ceiver is 3 meters away from both transmitters. Each device
is a USRP connected to a PC. Both transmitters send the
same sequence of 64 symbols (i.e., the transmission unit at
the wireless physical layer) to the receiver. As seen in Figure
3, the amplitude of symbols received from both transmitters
are diﬀerent from each other due to the diﬀerent channel dis-
tortions. Figure 4 shows the amplitude of received symbols
after the channel synchronization. Both received symbols
then become similar to each other.

Signal modulation: Before we discuss the proposed
channel calibration algorithm, we ﬁrst introduce the sig-
nal modulation/demodulation to facilitate the reader’s un-
derstanding. We focus our discussion on I/Q modulation,
because it is widely used in modern wireless systems.
In
I/Q modulation, signals are transmitted in the form of sym-
bols, which are the transmission unit at the wireless physical
layer. We use Quadrature Phase-Shift Keying (QPSK) mod-
ulation, a typical I/Q modulation, as an example to show
how I/Q modulation works.

QPSK encodes two bits into one symbol at a time.

In
Figure 5 (a), bits 00, 01, 10, and 11 are represented by
points whose coordinates are (-1,-1), (-1,1), (1,-1), and (1,1)
in an I/Q plane, respectively. The I/Q plane is called a
constellation diagram. A symbol is the coordinate of a point
on the constellation diagram. Due to the channel noise,
a received symbol is not exactly the same as the original
symbol sent by the sender. To demodulate, the receiver
outputs the point that is closest to the received symbol on
the constellation diagram as the demodulation result.
2.2.1 Basic Channel Synchronization
Same signals from diﬀerent transmitters will exhibit dis-
tinct wave shapes when they come to the receiver, because
they undergo diﬀerent channel distortions. Thus, on the
constellation diagram, the receiver not only receives multi-
ple symbols from the multiple transmitters at the same time,
but these symbols have diﬀerent phases and amplitudes. As

0204060−0.4−0.200.20.4AmplitudeReceived symbols  TX1TX20204060−0.4−0.200.20.4AmplitudeReceived symbols  TX1TX2294an example shown in Figure 5 (a), the receiver receives four
symbols from four transmitters and these symbols are at dif-
ferent positions on the constellation diagram. The received
symbols can interfere with each other, and consequently it
becomes diﬃcult for the receiver to correctly decode the re-
ceived packets. Hence, channel synchronization is required
in the proposed scheme so that the received symbols can
converge to the same ideal point to form a good construc-
tive interference.

Figure 5: Basic channel synchronization

In our basic idea, we propose to calibrate the symbols
before they are transmitted to oﬀset the channel distortion.
As shown in Figure 5 (b), the original symbol sent by the
transmitter is (1,1) and the corresponding received symbol
is at point A on the constellation diagram. For QPSK, the
angle between the ideal point (1, 1) and the horizontal axis
is π
4 . Thus, the coordinate of the received symbol can be
represented by (
4 )), where a
is amplitude attenuation factor, and θ is the phase shift
between the received symbol and the ideal point (1, 1).

√
2
2 a cos(θ + π

√
2
2 a sin(θ + π

4 ),

Channel synchronization aims to calibrate the received
symbols to the corresponding ideal points. Toward this end,
rather than transmitting the ideal points, the transmitter
transmits symbols that deviate from the ideal points in a
way that oﬀset the channel distortion. As shown in Figure
5 (c), the transmitter transmits a symbol A(cid:48), whose phase
shift from the ideal point (1,1) is −θ and the magnitude is
1
a , in lieu of the ideal point (1, 1). Thus, the coordinate
4 − θ)).
of the calibrated symbol is (
When this symbol arrives at the receiver, the calibration
oﬀset cancels the channel eﬀect, and thereby the received
symbol will converge to the ideal point.

√
2a cos( π

√
2a sin( π

2

4 − θ),

2

The transmitter needs to know θ and a for the channel
synchronization. Due to the channel reciprocity property,
the wireless channel remains the same if the roles of the
transmitter and the receiver are exchanged [6]. Thus, train-
ing stages can be utilized for the transmitter to measure θ
and a from the training symbols sent by the receiver. To
further reduce the communication overhead, the transmit-
ter can obtain θ and a in the piggyback way. Speciﬁcally,
it can measure them from the symbols that are contained
in the existing up-link packets (e.g., service request packets
and acknowledgement packets) sent by receivers.
2.2.2 Reﬁned Channel Synchronization against the

Multipath Effect

Multipath eﬀect is the phenomena that signals sent by the
transmitter travel along multiple paths to reach the receiver.
Thus, the receiver can receive multiple copies of the origi-
nal signal from the multiple paths. These signal copies can
interfere with each other and confuse the receiver to obtain
an incorrect message decoding results.

The signal propagation paths can be generally classiﬁed as
unresolvable and resolvable paths. For a transmitted sym-
bol, the copies traveling on unresolvable paths arrive at the
receiver with an arrival time diﬀerence less than one symbol
duration, i.e., the transmission time of one symbol. Thus,
they form one symbol on the constellation diagram. For
resolvable paths, the copies traveling on these paths arrive
at the receiver with a time diﬀerence larger than one sym-
bol duration, and therefore on the constellation diagram
they form separate symbols that interfere future transmit-
ted symbols.
In this paper, we only consider the impact
of signal copies from resolvable paths, because they are the
major factors that contribute to the inter-symbol interfer-
ence and the decoding failures. Speciﬁcally, for L resolvable
paths, the receiver will then receive L copies of subsequently
transmitted symbols.

Figure 6 (a) shows an example of a 3-path channel. The
transmitter transmits three symbols S0, S1, and S2. At
time t0, the receiver receives S0 from Path 1. At time t1,
the receiver receives S1 from Path 1 and a delayed copy of
S0 from Path 2. At time t2, the receiver receives S2 from
Path 1, the delayed copy of S1 from Path 2, and the delayed
copy of S0 from Path 3.

Figure 6: Reﬁned channel synchronization against
the multipath eﬀect

We propose to cancel the interference caused by multi-
path symbols via adding a complementary symbol to the
transmitted symbol. Speciﬁcally, Figure 6 (b) shows the
snapshot of the constellation diagram at time t2 for the
aforementioned 3-path channel, the superposed impact of
the delayed copies of S0 and S1 can be represented by an
equivalent symbol Sm, which is the vector sum of S0 and S1.
To eliminate the multipath symbols, in addition to sending
the desired symbol S2, the transmitter also needs to send a
cancelation symbol ¯Sm that is at the reverse position of Sm.
The magnitude of Sm and ¯Sm are the same but ¯Sm shifts
from Sm by an angle of π. As shown in ﬁgure 6 (c), the
vector sum of the desired symbol S2 and ¯Sm is S. Thus, the
transmitter performs the basic synchronization to calibrate
S to S(cid:48) to resist against the channel noise, and the actually
transmitted symbol is S(cid:48).

We would like to point out that ¯Sm can only eliminate the
multipath eﬀects from previous symbols S0 and S1. How-
ever, subsequent symbols will still be interfered by the cali-
brated ¯Sm due to the multipath eﬀects. So all these symbols
should be calibrated in the same way, and the i-th symbol
can be calibrated only after all its previous L − 1 symbols
are already calibrated. We discuss the details in Section 3.
3. MULTIPATH CHANNEL CALIBRATION
To achieve the channel calibration, the transmitter must
ﬁrst get the channel impulse response (CIR), which includes

(-1,1)(1,1)(-1,-1)(1,-1)qa(-1,1)(1,1)(-1,-1)(1,-1)q-(b) Receiver(c)  Channel synchronization(-1,1)(1,1)(-1,-1)(1,-1)(a) Received symbolsAA’4/p(-1,1)(1,1)(1,-1)(b) Received symbols(-1,1)(1,1)(1,-1)(c) Transmitted symbolsS1S0SmSmS(-1,-1)(-1,-1)S2S2SmS’S0S1S2Path 1S0S1S2S0S1S2Path 2Path 3t0t1t2time(a) 3-path example295the amplitude attenuation coeﬃcient, phase shift, and the
eﬀects of the multipath propagation. Traditionally, channel
estimation algorithms [7] are applied at the receiver to adapt
received signals to the current channel conditions. How-
ever, we cannot directly use these methods in the proposed
scheme, because we require that signals to reach the receiver
with same shapes to gain the constructive interference. In-
spired by the channel reciprocity that the channel eﬀects
observed by the transmitter and the receiver are the same
during the communication, we propose to directly estimate
the CIR at the transmitter and then use this information to
calibrate the transmit signals.
3.1 Preliminary

To facilitate the presentation of the proposed technique,
we ﬁrst give the preliminary knowledge about the channel
estimation. Channel is usually estimated using a prede-
ﬁned training sequence that are composed of multiple sym-
bols. Speciﬁcally, the training sequence is known to both the
transmitter and the receiver prior to their communication.
The transmitter sends the training sequence to the receiver
through the wireless channel, and upon receiving, the re-
ceiver uses the original training sequence and the received
copy to estimate the channel.

In general, the received training sequence is distorted by
both channel eﬀects and the noise. It can be expressed by
r = h∗ d + n, where h is the channel state information, d is
the original training sequence, ∗ is the convolution operator,
and n is the channel noise that is normally considered as a
zero-mean Gaussian noise. We can rewrite this equation in
the matrix form below.





h1
h2
.
.
hL

 + n



r =

0
d1
.

d1
d2
.
dL
.
dK dK−1

dL−1

.

0
0
.
d1
.

.
.
.
.
.
. dK−L+1

, where the vector [d1, d2, ....., dk]t denotes the known train-
ing data d, vector [h1, h2, ....., hL]t denotes the unknown
channel h, and [n1, n2, ....., nk]t denotes the unknown chan-
nel noise n. Note that k is the length of the training sequence
and it must be larger than L to enable the estimation of the
channel.

To facilitate our analysis, we rewrite the above matrix
equation into the compact form and we can obtain r =
Dh + n. Normally, least-square (LS) estimator can be used
to solve h from the compact equation for channel estima-
tion [8], yielding the estimation result ˆh = {DHD}−1DHr,
where H denotes the complex conjugate transpose operator.
In our scheme, channel estimation is done at the transmit-
ter, and the training sequence is sent from the receiver. Due
to the channel reciprocity property, the channel estimated
by the transmitter will represent the channel between itself
and the receiver. To cope with the channel changes, the
training sequence can be sent periodically so that the trans-
mitter can capture the current CIR.
3.2 Advanced Channel Calibration

As discussed earlier, we propose to construct a comple-
mentary symbol for each transmitted symbol to cancel the
multipath eﬀect. The complementary symbol for the i-th
transmitted symbol is constructed not only based on the i-

th transmitted symbol but also based on L − 1 previously
transmitted symbols.

Obtaining calibrate symbols: Let ˆh = [ ˆh1, ˆh2, ....., ˆhL]T
denote the estimated channel, and dr = [d1r , d2r , ....., dkr ]T
denote the desired, interference-free received symbols. Fur-
ther let dt = [d1t , d2t , ....., dkt ]T denote the calibrated sym-
bols to be transmitted to the receiver. Note that dt com-
bines both complementary and original symbols. At time
t0, d1t is sent and it arrives at the receiver through the ﬁrst
path. The corresponding received symbol is d1r = d1t · ˆh1.
At time t1, d2t is sent, it arrives at the receiver through the
ﬁrst path, and meantime the multipath copy of d1t arrives
through the second path. The second received symbol can
ˆh1. Finally, at time
hence be presented as d2r = d1t
tk, the receiver will receive both the symbol dkt via the ﬁrst
path and the multipath copies of the previous L − 1 sym-
ˆhi. We
rewrite this linear relation using the matrix form and we

bols. The received symbol dkr is dkr =(cid:80)L
obtain:

=

i=1 dk−i+1t

ˆh2 + d2t

0
d1t
.

dL−1t







ˆh1
ˆh2
.
.
ˆhL

0
0
.
d1t
.

.
.
.
.
.
. dk−L+1t



d1t
d2t
.
dLt
.
dkt

d1r
d2r
.
.
dkr

.

dk−1t

We use the compact matrix form dr = Dtˆh to repre-
sent the above equation. Because Dt includes the calibrated
symbols to be sent by transmitters, we would like to solve
Dt from this equation. Intuitively, it can be computed by
Dt = drˆhH{ˆhˆhH}−1. However, since ˆh is a column vector,
ˆhˆhH is always a singular matrix and it’s not feasible to ﬁnd
its matrix reverse {ˆhˆhH}−1.

In the proposed scheme, the desired data [d1r , d2r , ..., dkr ]
and channel impulse response [ ˆh1, ˆh2, ..., ˆhL] are known. We
can thus ﬁnd Dt by recursively solving linear equations.
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst calibrated symbol d1t can be directly
calculated by d1t = d1r
. With d1t , we can then compute
ˆh1
the second calibrated symbol d2t by d2t = d2r −d1t
In
general, the k-th calibrated symbol can be computed by
ˆhidk−i+1t
dkt =
is the complementary component to eliminate the previous
multipath copies, and 1
is the basic calibration component
ˆh1
to compensate the power attenuation and phase shift of the
current symbol.

(k > L), where −(cid:80)L

dkr −(cid:80)L

ˆhidk−i+1t

i=2
ˆh1

i=2

ˆh1

ˆh2

.

Reducing channel estimation errors: To eliminate
the channel noise and accommodate normal temporal vari-
ance, we would like to utilize the zero-mean property of the
channel noise, i.e., to use the average values of multiple chan-
nel estimations to reduce the estimation error. Speciﬁcally,
we set a window of size N , and advance the window so that it
always keeps the most recent N channel estimations. The ul-
timate output channel impulse response is the average of the
N channel estimations in the window. Since the channel es-
timation is given by ˆh = {DHD}−1DHr, and the estimated
(cid:80)N
error is thus {DHD}−1DHn. The average ˆhavg of the N es-
i=1{DHD}−1DHri, and the
timations is 1
N
i=1 ni.
When N is chosen large, due to the zero mean property of
the channel noise, this error approximates to a zero vector.

average estimation error becomes {DHD}−1DH(cid:80)N

(cid:80)N

i=1 hi = 1

N

2964. JAMMING ENTANGLEMENT

Signal to noise ratio (SNR) is always a key metric to eval-
uate the reliability of a wireless communication system. Ac-
cording to Shannon Theorem [1], a large SNR can support
a high speed service than a small SNR on the same chan-
nel bandwidth. Thus, we would like to enable a receiver at
the desired location to always achieve a large SNR, and an
eavesdropper at an undesired location to encounter a low
SNR, so that it cannot distinguish the received signal from
the background noise and fails to decode received data.

The basic idea is to intentionally introduce noise to the
raised transmit signal, so that the noise can signiﬁcantly
reduce the SNR at the eavesdroppers but cancel each other
at the desired receiver to cause no impact.

In order to generate such noise signals for all transmit-
ters, we randomly divide the N transmitters into N
2 pairs.
For each pair, we assign one transmitter with a randomly
generated sequence, whose length is the same as the mes-
sage length. Then, we generate the opposite sequence for
the other transmitter. For example, if the randomly gener-
ated sequence is 1, 1,−1, 1, then the corresponding opposite
sequence is −1,−1, 1,−1. The pair of transmitters add the
corresponding noise sequences to the message and send the
combined signals to the wireless channel. Because the noise
signals are embedded in combined signals, which can syn-
chronize at the desired receiver, the noise signals naturally
achieve the synchronization to enable the cancelation. How-
ever, for the eavesdroppers, due to the lack of the time syn-
chronization and channel calibration, the noise signals fail
to cancel each other and the sum of them still confuse the
eavesdroppers. Moreover, the noise sequences are randomly
generated for each message, and thus the eavesdroppers can-
not guess and pre-determine them.

On the other hand, for a receiver that is not located at
the desired service location, due to the lack of channel syn-
chronization, it will experience distorted received signals in
various shapes, and consequently the jamming signals can-
not cancel each other, yielding a low SNR at the undesired
location. In Section 6.2, we show how the channel distortion
aﬀects the SNR at the undesired location.

5. TOLERABLE TIME SHIFT

In the above discussion, we consider the ideal case where
the arrival signals are perfectly synchronized. In practice, as
mentioned, after clock and propagation synchronization, a
slight time shift may still exists among the received signals
due to the processing delay and synchronization imperfec-
tions. In the following, we identify the tolerable time shift,
within which received signals can achieve the constructive
interference to obtain a boosted SNR.
5.1 Impact of the Time Shift on SNR

SNR is the ratio of the received signal power to the noise
power. Because the noise power is independent from the
time shift, the received signal power remains as the key met-
ric to determine the SNR at the desired receiver. Lemma 1
gives the threshold of the time shift based on the received
signal power. Without loss of generality, we assume that
there are two arrival signals to facilitate the presentation.

Lemma 1. The constructive interference does not happen
, where δt is the time shift between two arrival

if δt > 1
4f0
signals and f0 is the frequency of the baseband signal.

m cos θ2

(cid:82) T

2

2Amg(t)ejθm ] =

√
Proof: The modulated transmit signal S(t) can be writen
as S(t) = Re[
2Amg(t) cos θm, where
Am and θm are the amplitude and the phase of the transmit
signal respectively, and g(t) is the baseband signal. Typi-
√
cally, g(t) is a sine, cosine or rectangle wave [7]. Assume
g(t) = sin(2f0t), S(t) then equals to
2Am sin(2f0t) cos θm,
and its power is A2
m. When two signals arrive at the
receiver with a time shift of δt, the combined signal power Pc
2{Am sin(2f0t) cos θm +Am sin[2f0(t+
becomes Pc = 1
2− T
T
δt)] cos θm}2dt = 2A2
m cos θ2
m[1 + cos(2πf0δt)]. We can see
that Pc is highly associated with the time shift δt. When
δt = 1
m. On
4f0
the other hand, the SNR is A2
at each transmitter,
where Nc is the noise power. Because two arrival signals
bring twice of the noise power to the receiver, the received
signal power Pc must be larger than 2A2
m to achieve
a boosted SNR (i.e., the constructive interference). Thus,
the tolerable time shift should be less than 1
so that
4f0
Pc > 2A2
2
As a practical example, for the 1Mbps and 10Mbps trans-
mission speed with the QPSK modulator, a tolerable time
shift of

, the combined signal power Pc is 2A2

equals to 500 and 50ns respectively.

m cos θ2
m

Nc

m cos θ2

m.

m cos θ2

m cos θ2

√

1
4f0

6. SERVICE AREA SIZE

Because signals travel at the speed of light, it seems that
a small tolerable time shift may result in a large service area
(e.g. 50ns indicates a distance of 15m). In this section, we
attempt to obtain a ﬁne-grain service area using the channel
uncorrelation property, which states that two receivers will
observe diﬀerent channels from the same transmitter if they
are separate by a couple of wavelength away.
In particu-
lar, [9] indicates that a distance of half wavelength can lead
to uncorrelated channels. In the following part, we will in-
vestigate how uncorrelated channels aﬀect the boosted SNR.
6.1 Channel Uncorrelation Property

We ﬁrst describe the channel uncorrelation property and
explore the distance required to generate the uncorrelated
channels. Channel correlation coeﬃcient is normally used
to indicate the similarity between two channels. When two
channels are fully correlated, the coeﬃcient approximates
to 1; while when two channels are uncorrelated from each
other, the coeﬃcient is 0. Theoretically, the multipath chan-
nel is usually modeled as the Rayleigh fading channel [10].
In a rich, isotropic scattering environment, multipath com-
ponents arrive at the receiver from all the directions, and
the corresponding channel correlation coeﬃcient can be de-
scribed as a zeroth order Bessel function [11]: ρ(d, f ) =
J0(2πd/λ), where d is the distance between the receiver and
the eavesdropper, f is the carrier frequency of the signal, and
λ = c
f is the wavelength of the signal. When we substitute
d = λ
2 into this function, the channel correlation coeﬃcient
approximates to 0, which indicates that two channels are
uncorrelated.
In practice, [12] presents that a longer dis-
tance (e.g. a couple of wavelength) may be required to get
the uncorrelated channels when there are less scatterings.
6.2 Power Attenuation by the Channel Uncor-

relation

In this part, we discuss how the uncorrelated channels
aﬀect the boosted SNR. As mentioned earlier, channels ob-

297served by the eavesdropper are uncorrelated from the cal-
ibrated ones. Thus, channel eﬀects cannot be eliminated
and signals will exhibit diﬀerent shapes when they arrive at
the eavesdropper. Lemma 2 gives the SNR at the desired
location and undesired location respectively.

Lemma 2. The SNR at the desired location and the unde-
sired location are 4Ph·Pt
respectively,
where Pt is the transmit power of orignal signal, Nc is the
channel noise power, Pj is the jamming signal power and Ph
is the channel variance.

(Pt (cid:29) Nc

) and

Pj +Nc

Ph

Nc

Pt

path channel is described as h(τ ) = (cid:80)L

Proof: Without loss of generality, we assume two trans-
mitters. The calibrated signals from two transmitters are
denoted as S1 and S2 respectively. Let Pt be the trans-
mit power for both signals. Assume the receiver observes
two channels h1(τ ) and h2(τ ). According to [1], Multi-
l=1 alejφl δ(τ − τl),
where al and ejθl are the amplitude attenuation and phase
shift of the signal copy that travel along the i-th path. At
time τl, channel h1(τl) and h2(τl) can be modeled as the
random variables with zero mean and a variance that is
usually denoted as Ph [13]. Thus, at this time, the re-
ceived signal is S1 · h1(τl) + S2 · h2(τl). Since the mean
value of the received signal is 0, we can get the eavesdrop-
per’s power by calculating its variance. Speciﬁcally, for
a random variable x with the zero mean, its power P =
Thus, Ps = V ar[S1 · h1(τl) + S2 · h2(τl)] = PtE[|h1(τl)|2 +
2|h1(τl) · h2(τl)∗| + |h2(τl)|2] = 2Ph · Pt + 2ρPh · Pt, where
ρ is deﬁned as the channel correlation coeﬃcient and equals
[14], and ∗ de-
to

(cid:82) x2f (x)dt = V ar(x), where V ar(.) donates the variance.

|h1(τl)·h2(τl)∗|

|h1(τl)·h2(τl)∗|

√

=

V ar(|h1(τl)|)V ar(|h2(τl)|)

Ph
notes the complex conjugate operator.

At the undesired location, the channels of two transmit-
ters are uncorrelated from each other. Thus, their coeﬃcient
ρ equals to 0 and the received power is Ps = 2Ph·Pt. On the
other hand, two channels observed by the desired receiver
are calibrated and are quite correlated with each other. So
their coeﬃcient ρ equals to 1 and thus the received power is
Ps = 4Ph · Pt.

The power of jamming signals can be derived in the same
way. Assume two calibrated jamming signals are denoted
as C1 and C2 (C1 = −C2) with the power Pj for each of
them. Assume the receiver observes two channels h1(τ ) and
h2(τ ). At time τl, the combined power of two jamming
signals is given by Pc = V ar[C1 · h1(τl) + C2 · h2(τl)] =
2Ph · Pj − 2ρPh · Pj. At the desired location, the receiver
observes two correlated channels. Thus, ρ equals to 1 and
the combined power equals to 0. At undesired location, two
channels observed by the receiver are uncorrelated. Thus,
ρ equals to 0, and the combined power equals to 2Ph · Pj,
which can signiﬁcant aﬀect the SNR of the receiver.

Note that SNR is represented as the ratio of the origi-
nal signal power (given by Ps) to the sum of jamming sig-
nal power (given by Pc) and channel noise power Nc. At
the desired location, channels are synchronized, and orig-
inal signals get boosted and jamming signals cancel each
other, yielding an SNR that equals to 4Ph·Pt
. The transmit
power Pt as well as the jamming signal power Pj are usu-
ally chosen much higher than the channel noise power Nc to
result in a satisﬁable SNR at the receiver (Pt (cid:29) Nc
). So
Nc is negligible compared to the jamming power. Accord-
ingly, at the undesired location, the channel is not synchro-

Ph

Nc

nized(i.e. ρ is close to zero) and the SNR is represented by
SN R = Ps
2

≈ Pt

.

Pc+Nc

Pj +Nc

Impact of SNR on service area size: Assume Pj = Pt,
from Lemma 2, we can see that SNR approximate to 1
when ρ = 0 and the value 1 is the minima of SNR. With
SN R = 1, the receiver cannot distinguish between the orig-
inal and jamming signals. Theoretically, ρ = 0 happens
when the receiver is half wavelength far from the desired
location. For example, modern wireless devices like WIFI,
Bluetooth devices usually uses 2.4GHz as their central fre-
quency to transmit signals. The corresponding wavelength
is 0.125m (i.e. (3 × 108)/(2.4 × 109) = 0.125m), and the
service area size is 6.125 × 6.125cm2, when real signal and
jamming signal have the same power.

In practice, a couple of wavelength may be required to
gain such uncorrelated channels. For example, if the uncor-
relation is caused by 4 wavelengths, the service size will be
0.5 × 0.5m2. SNR at the undesired location also shows that
SNR decreases as the jamming signal power Pj increases.
Thus, if we require a smaller service area size in this sce-
nario, we may properly increase the jamming signal power
to meet the requirements.

6.3 Security Discussion

An attacker against the proposed system can be either
active or passive. An active attacker tries to create, inter-
rupt, intercept, block or overwrite the transmit signals to
prevent the receiver from obtaining the legitimate service.
The active attacker may launch multiple attacks. For exam-
ple, It may impersonate as an authorized service provider
to gain the trust of a receiver; It may inject malicious in-
formation into the channel to mislead the receiver; It may
jam the receiver so that the receiver cannot obtain the ser-
vice. However, these active attackers are not unique to our
scheme. Existing approaches have been proposed to deal
with these attacks. For example, the receiver can establish
the cryptographic authentication protocol with the service
provider to deal with impersonation attacks and conﬁrm the
message integrity [15] [16], and spread spectrum techniques
like Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum(FHSS) and Di-
rect Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) can be designed to
defend against jamming attacks [17] [18].

A passive attacker is usually an eavesdropper, which at-
tempts to obtain the legitimate service from the service
provider. For a basic eavesdropper, as shown in Lemma 2,
when the eavesdropper’s channel is totally uncorrelated from
the receiver’s channel, it will not achieved a boosted SNR
to decode the received service data.
It seems that multi-
ple eavesdroppers with high-gain, directional antennas may
collaborate to add their received signals together to form
a boosted signal, with which they can decode the original
service data. Nevertheless, no matter how many eavesdrop-
pers exist, the signals received by these eavesdroppers still
suﬀer from the wireless channel fading like the multipath
fading, and always exhibit diﬀerent shapes as long as their
channels are not calibrated for homomorphism at the service
provider side. Both the channel distortion and the jamming
signal cause the sum of received signals equivalent to that
of multiple random signals. As such, a boosted SNR cannot
be obtained for correct decoding.

2987. MULTI-USER MODE

Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA), and Frequency Division Multiple
Access (FDMA) are three typical methods adopted by mod-
ern wireless communication systems to support multi-user
access. For CDMA, users are assigned with special designed
codes that are orthogonal to each other, and an individual
user can extract its own data by correlating received signals
with the assigned codes. For TDMA and FDMA, users are
assigned with distinct, non-overlapping time slots/frequency
bands to send and receive wireless signals. By utilizing dif-
ferent codes, time slots, and frequencies, the interferences
among wireless users can be eliminated.

These traditional techniques can be integrated into the
pinpoint system to support multiple users. Speciﬁcally, for
CDMA, the transmitter can directly encode jamming entan-
gled signal using the CDMA codes to deliver information
to all users. Since users are located at diﬀerent locations,
the transmit signals may need to be sent at distinct times
to compensate the time diﬀerence, and thus asynchronous
CDMA scheme is required at the transmitter. For TDMA,
the transmitter can pinpoint the service to each user dur-
ing its time slot. Note that the propagation synchroniza-
tion may introduce overlapping time slots due to the vary-
ing time shifts experienced by diﬀerent users. Thus, proper
time guard should be inserted between time slots to elimi-
nate the overlaps and avoid the interference among multiple
users. For FDMA, the transmitter can pinpoint the service
to each user at the assigned frequency band. If the Orthog-
onal Frequency-division Multiplexing (OFDM) is enforced,
because the spectrum assigned to each user by OFDM is
normally limited, the receiver may have a weak multipath
eﬀect that causes less distortion to jamming entangled sig-
nals. Nevertheless, the amplitude attenuations are diﬀerent
for diﬀerent locations, without channel synchronization, the
jamming entangled signals still exhibit random amplitudes
when arrive at an undesired receiver, and consequently the
jamming portion cannot cancel each other, ensuring the ser-
vice exclusiveness.
8. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

We develop a prototype pinpoint service system on top of
the Universal Software Deﬁned Radio Peripherals (USRPs),
which are radio frequency (RF) transceivers with high band-
width and high dynamic range processing capability. The
USRPs use SBX broadband daughter boards operating in
the 400 - 4400 Mhz range as RF front ends. The software
toolkit implementing the prototype is the GNURadio [19].
8.1 System Design

The receiver is a standalone USRP, and the transmitter
(i.e., the service provider) consists of two USRPs connected
by an multiple-input and multiple-output (MIMO) cable.
Both USRPs follow the master and slave protocol. Specif-
ically, the master USRP connects to both the slave USRP
and the host computer, and the slave USRP only connects to
the master USRP. The master provides the clock scale and
the time reference to the slave USRP through the MIMO
cable. The master and slave USRPs are separated by about
0.75 meter to achieve uncorrelated channels between each
USRP and the receiver.

Our software program is developed from the Benchmark
TX/RX Program, which is the communication tool pro-

vided by GNURadio for data transmission and ﬁle trans-
fer between two USRPs. The source codes are located at
gnuradio/gr-digital/examples. For the transmitter, we re-
design the modulation block of the Benchmark TX program
by adding two new modules, namely jamming signal entan-
glement and channel calibration modules. We also add a
delay compensation module to compensate the diﬀerence of
signal arrival times measured at the master and slave US-
RPs. An input bit sequence is ﬁrst modulated into physical
layer symbols, then entangled with jamming signals, and ﬁ-
nally transmitted to the receiver after channel calibration
and delay compensation. Because the receiver requires no
speciﬁc changes, we directly run the Benchmark RX Pro-
gram at the receiver but add a constellation sink to observe
the real time constellation diagram for analyzing the perfor-
mance.
8.2 Example Pinpoint Service

We choose two typical types of service data, pictures and
videos, to visually validate the eﬀect of the pinpoint proto-
type. Figure 7 shows the received pictures at diﬀerent posi-
tions. At the desired location, the receiver can successfully
download the original picture sent by the transmitter. We
then move the receiver 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 meter away from the
desired location, and ﬁnd a drastic worsening of the packet
delivery rate. When the receiver is 0.3 meter away, the pic-
ture cannot be displayed at all due to the huge number of
packet loss.

We also implement the real-time video transmission that
sends a live scene captured by a web camera to the receiver.
Speciﬁcally, a web camera is connected to the transmitter to
surveillance the surrounding of the transmitter. We encode
the video stream using MPEG-4 AVC, which is the most
commonly used format for video compression, and input the
stream into the USRPs through the Linux socket interface.
We then pinpoint the stream to the receiver at the desired
location. The receiver downloads and decodes packets from
the transmitter and displays them on a video player. We
observe a clear and ﬂuent video when the receiver is located
at the desired position, and the video quality deteriorates
when the receiver moves away from undesired locations. In
particular, we encounter frequent video stuck while playing,
and severely distorted images. At the physical layer, we ﬁnd
that received symbols signiﬁcantly deviate from the ideal
points on the constellation diagram, thereby yielding a huge
amount of demodulation errors. We recorded the video dete-
rioration process and an anonymous demo video on youtube
can be found at https://youtu.be/lJ64bxYP5SM.
In the
following, we discuss the details of the evaluation results.
8.3 Evaluation Metrics

We evaluate the prototype system using the following typ-

ical metrics for measuring the service of quality:

• Signal to noise ratio (SNR): This is the ratio of the
received signal power to the noise power, which is the
sum of both the jamming signal power and the channel
noise power.

• Packet delivery rate: This is the ratio of the number
of correctly received packets to the total number of re-
ceived packets. In the prototype implementation, each
packet is appended with a 32-bit cyclic redundancy
check (CRC) code for error detection, and preﬁxed

299(a) Desired location

(b) 0.1 meter away

(c) 0.2 meter away

(d) 0.3 meter away

Figure 7: Received pictures at diﬀerent positions

with a 64-bit access code for packet synchronization.
The length of each packet is 500 bytes. The receiver
detects packets by correlating received bits with the
access code. A high correlation indicates the arrival of
a packet, and the receiver veriﬁes this packet by look-
ing at the CRC. We consider a packet to be received
correctly only if the packet passes CRC check.

• Throughput: Throughput is the number of correctly
received packets per unit time. To facilitate the com-
parison, we normalize the throughput into the range
of 0 − 1. If the throughput is close to 1, the bit rate
at the receiver is close to that at the transmitter, and
thus the service delay is near zero. If the throughput
is 0, no information bits are received at the receiver
and the service delay is regarded as inﬁnity.

In addition to the pervious metrics, we also introduce a
fourth metric, channel cross-decorrelation, which quan-
tiﬁes the disparity between two channels. A small cross-
decorrelation value indicates a strong correlation between
two channels, and a large value indicates two channels are
uncorrelated with each other. We include channel cross-
decorrelation as an extra evaluation metric, because the ser-
vice quality is also highly relevant with this metric. The
cross-decorrelation between the channels of desired and un-
desired locations should be large, so that a receiver at a
undesired location cannot obtain a service of good quality.
8.4 Measuring Channel Cross-decorrelation
SNR values, packet delivery rate and throughput can be
easily measured from the communication traﬃc based on
their deﬁnitions above. However, how to measure the last
metric channel cross-decorrelation is not as straightforward
as the pervious three metrics, because it reﬂects the dis-
parity among wireless channels that cannot be directly ob-
served.
In the following, we discuss our methodology to
measure this metric.

To achieve the channel calibration, an accurate channel
estimation between the transmitter and the receiver is re-
quired. We estimate the channel in a training stage, where
the receiver broadcasts a beacon signal to the transmitter,
and transmitter then measures the corresponding channel
impulse response from the received beacon signal. At the
training stage, we measure the channel for 500 times and
took the average value as the current channel impulse re-
sponse. Thus, we can eliminate the impact of the unex-
pected disturbance caused by the channel noise, normal tem-
poral variations, and other interferences.

Figures 8 and 9 plot the magnitude (i.e. amplitude atten-
uation) and phase (i.e phase shift) of the average channel

Figure 8: USRP 1

Figure 9: USRP 2

impulse response measured at the two USRPs respectively.
The system operates on the central frequency of 2.4 GHz
and adopts the binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modula-
tion. The unit of the X-axis is a symbol duration, which
is approximately the minimum time required to resolve two
paths. We can see that the channels of both USRPs are
quite diﬀerent in shape and magnitude. This observation is
consistent with the basic experiment setting, in which both
USRPs are separated by a certain distance to ensure the
uncorrelated channels.

Cross and Auto-variance: Before we introduce how
to measure the channel cross-decorrelation to quantize such
channel diﬀerence, we ﬁrst deﬁne two terms cross-variance
and auto-variance that will be involved in calculating the
channel cross-decorrelation. The cross-variance is deﬁned as
(cid:80)N
the Euclidean distance between two diﬀerent channels. For
channels i and j, their average cross-variance Vij is calcu-
n=1 |hin − havgj|, where N is the total number
lated by 1
N
of channel measurements, hin is the n-th estimated chan-
nel impulse response of channel i, and havgj is the average
channel impulse response of channel j. When i = j, the
cross-variance degenerates to the auto-variance Vii, which
is the Euclidean distance between an one-time channel mea-
surement and the average of multiple channel measurements
for the same channel. In the experiment, we use the aver-
age value of the auto-variance over all the channel estima-
tions. Figure 10 plots the distributions of the cross and
auto-variance of previous channels measured at two USRPs.
In addition, we also plot the cross variance of two channels
measured after the channel calibration. The cross-variance
before the calibration is much larger than the auto-variance,
because the channels of both USRPs are uncorrelated from
each other. After the calibration, the cross-variance is closed
to the auto-variance within one channel that indicates two
channel are quite correlated.

Channel Cross-decorrelation: We use channel cross-
decorrelation to normalize the cross-variance to facilitate the

24681000.020.040.06AttenuationTime delay  246810−4−202Phase ShiftAttenuationPhase Shift24681000.0050.01AttenuationTime delay  246810−505Phase ShiftAttenuationPhase Shift3001

2 |havgi+havgj| .

comparisons of the similarity and diﬀerence among wireless
channels, and the cross-decorrelation Rij between channels
i and j is deﬁned as Rij =

|Vij−Vjj|

A cross-decorrelation value of 0.5 means that the channel
diﬀerence is as large as 50% of the magnitude of the averages
of the two channels. The cross-decorrelation ranges between
0 and 2.
If it is larger than 1, the channel diﬀerence is
even larger than the magnitude of the averages of the two
channels. In Figure 10, for USRP 1 (master) and USRP 2
(slave), their cross-decorrelations are R12 = 1.28 and R21 =
1.30, which indicate that the channels measured at both
USRPs are quite diﬀerent from each other.
In addition,
after the calibration, their cross-decorrelations measured are
R12 = 0.040 and R21 = 0.043, which indicates two channels
after the calibration are highly correlated.
8.5 Jamming Signal Entanglement

As mentioned earlier, we entangle the jamming signals
into transmit signals to conceal the real information. The
jamming signals should cancel each other at the desired lo-
cation but jam the original signals at undesired locations,
so that eavesdroppers at those locations cannot distinguish
the original signals from the jamming signals, and thus fail
to decode the data.

We randomly choose an indoor location, namely Position
1, to place the receiver and calibrate the channel between
the receiver and the transmitter. We mark this location as
the desired location. We then randomly choose three other
locations, namely Positions 2, 3, and 4, that are about 0.1,
0.2, and 0.3 meter away from the desired location respec-
tively. We mark these locations as the undesired locations.
Figure 13(a) plots the symbols on the constellation diagram
with jamming signal entanglement for the desired location,
i.e., Position 1. We can see that received symbols converge
to the ideal points at Position 1. Due to slightly imperfect
synchronization and normal oscillator shift, jamming signals
may not exactly cancel each other and the residue introduces
an additional noise that cause the deviation of the received
symbols. Nevertheless, such noise is too small to impact
the decoding accuracy and the received symbols still closely
ﬂuctuate around the ideal points.

Figures 13(b), 13(c), and 13(d) plot received symbols at
undesired locations, i.e., Positions 2, 3, and 4, when jamming
signal entanglement is enforced. As mentioned earlier, for
undesired locations, transmit signals are not calibrated and
they arrive at the receiver in diﬀerent shapes and thus the
jamming signals do not cancel each other, leading to a high
demodulation error rate. As seen in these ﬁgures, received
symbols randomly scatter around the entire constellation
diagram, and become more and more diﬃcult to decode with
the increasing distance from Position 1, the desired location.
8.6 Service Area Size

We would like to explore the service area size achieved
by the prototype system in the real world. The experiment
environment is a typical indoor room with wooden doors,
metal and wooden obstacles, and electronic devices. Figure
11 shows the positions of the transmitter and the receiver.
The transmitter is placed at Position 0 and we pinpoint
the service to Positions 1, 2, 3, and 4. For each test, the
transmitter sends 3000 packets to the receiver.

Impact of distance: Without loss of generality, we choose
four moving directions for the four positions. For Positions

1, 2, 3, and 4, the receiver moves towards(⇑), backwards(⇓),
to the right(⇒), and to the left(⇐) of the transmitter. Ta-
ble 1 shows the impact of the distance between the receiver
and the desired location on the aforementioned four evalu-
ation metrics, i.e., SNR, packet delivery rate, throughput,
and the channel cross-decorrelation.
In this test, the sys-
tem operates on the central frequency of 2.4GHz and the
ratio of desired signal power to jamming signal power is set
to 1. In this table, Pos., Dir., D, Corr., and PDR denote
position, moving direction, distance between the receiver
and the desired location, cross-decorrelation, and packet de-
livery rate respectively. These abbreviations are also ap-
plied for the subsequent tables. As seen in Table 1, mov-
ing directions cause no noticeable impact on the four met-
rics. For each of the four desired locations, when the re-
ceiver is located at this location, i.e., distance is equal to
0, the receiver achieves the maximum SNR, packet delivery
rate, and throughput. When the receiver moves away from
this location, the channel cross-decorrelation increases and
the corresponding SNR, packet delivery rate, and through-
put decrease signiﬁcantly. In particular, when the distance
reaches 0.3 meter, the throughput at all four positions ap-
proximately reaches to 0 and thus no service is received.

Table 1: Impact of the distance

Pos. Dir. D(cm) Corr.
0.038
0.33
0.66
1.25
0.039
0.30
0.76
1.12
0.012
0.31
0.72
1.10
0.013
0.25
0.77
1.15

⇑
⇑
⇑
⇑
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇒
⇒
⇒
⇒
⇐
⇐
⇐
⇐

0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30

1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4

SNR
14.0
5.1
3.5
-1.4
14.0
7.0
3.4
0

14.9
8.2
3.5
0.8
14.9
9.5
4.4
1.5

PDR
99.71%
68.75%
57.41%
6.28%
99.18%
80.65%
39.70%
19.74%
97.61%
74.79%
41.57%
20.08%
96.53%
85.85%
58.95%
21.43%

Throughput

0.93
0.53
0.35
0.012
0.93
0.61
0.17
0.031
0.92
0.47
0.26
0.078
0.90
0.64
0.30
0.062

Impact of central frequency: Theoretically, reducing
the central frequency can enlarge the service area, because
it can increase the signal wavelength and therefore raise the
distance required for the channel uncorrelation. In this test,
we reduce the central frequency from 2.4 GHz to 1.2 GHz
to remeasure the four metrics at Positions 1 and 2, the ra-
tio of desired signal power to jamming signal power remains
unchanged (i.e 1), and the results are shown in Table 2. For
the 2.4 GHz central frequency shown in table1, when the
receiver is moved 0.3 meter away from the desired location,
the channel cross-decorrelation is 1.21 and 1.16 at Positions
1 and 2 respectively. For the 1.2 GHz central frequency
shown in table2, a similar channel cross-decorrelation, i.e.,
1.25 at Positions 1 and 1.12 at position 2, is achieved with
an increased distance of 0.45 meter. Thus, a lower frequency
can cause a larger service area. This experimental observa-
tion is consistent with the theoretical conclusion.

Impact of signal to jamming power ratio: As dis-
cussed in Section 6.2, we can reduce the service area size
by decreasing the ratio of desired signal power to jamming

301Figure 10: Distribution of diﬀerent
variance

Figure 11: Floor plan: Service area
size

Figure 12: Floor plan: pinpoint ac-
curacy

(a) Position1

(b) Position2 (0.1 meter from
Position1)

(c) Position3 (0.2 meter from
Position1)

(d) Position4 (0.3 meter from
Position1)

Figure 13: Jamming signal entanglement

SNR
26.0
10.45

Table 2: Impact of the central frequency (1.2GHz)
Pos. Dir. D(cm) Corr.
Throughput
0.018
0.29
0.65
1.21
0.025
0.34
0.74
1.16

PDR
99.42%
88.33%
63.93%
20.66%
99.33%
88.75%
62.27%
14.45%

0.96
0.77
0.33
0.089
0.98
0.56
0.35
0.055

0
15
30
45
0
15
30
45

4.1
0

22.5
8.0
4.4
0

1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2

⇑
⇑
⇑
⇑
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓

signal power. Unlike previous experiment settings that use
a ratio of 1, we decrease the ratio from 1 to 0.5 to test the
impact in position 1 and 2, and our experimental observa-
tion matches the previous discussion result. Speciﬁcally, as
shown in table1 with a ratio of 1, the throughput reduces to
approximately 0 when the receiver is 0.3 meter away from a
desired location. However, with a ratio of 0.5, the through-
put reaches zero when the receiver is 0.2 meter away from
the desired location as shown in table3. So the service area
shrinks with the decreasing signal to jamming power ratio.

Table 3: Impact of the power ratio of desired signal
to jamming signal ( ratio = 0.5)

Pos. Dir. D(cm) Corr.
0.042
0.36
0.67
0.039
0.35
0.74

0
10
20
0
10
20

⇑
⇑
⇑
⇓
⇓
⇓

1
1
1
2
2
2

SNR
10.1
1.3
-1.15
11.0
1.9
-1.3

PDR
90.33%
25.76%
4.78%
96.28%
32.33%
23.93%

Throughput

0.72
0.12
0.01
0.69
0.13
0.024

8.7 Pinpoint Accuracy

We test how accurate the prototype system can pinpoint
the service to a desired location in a meeting room. Figure
12 shows the positions of the transmitter and receivers. We
place the transmitter in the front of the room (i.e. posi-
tion 0) and the desired receiver in the middle of the room
(i.e. Position 1). We also place 8 eavesdroppers scattering
around the desired receiver (i.e. at Positions 2 to 9). The
wireless communication system operates on the central fre-
quency of 2.4GHz and adopts the binary phase shift keying
(BPSK) modulation. The power ratio of the desired signal
to jamming signal is set to 1 and the bit rate is 1Mbps.

Table 4: Pinpoint accuracy

Pos. Cross-decorrelation

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

0.026
0.65
0.81
0.92
1.14
0.91
1.66
1.62
0.96

SNR
14.0
2.4
2.4
0.8
1.6
1.9
-1.5
-1.0

0

PDR
99.27%
31.68%
19.39%
13.70%
23.26%
23.71%
2.69%
24.72%
29.69%

Throughput

0.98
0.20
0.12
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.003
0.02
0.04

The pinpoint accuracy is displayed in Table 4. The re-
ceiver at the desired location can approximately achieve
a SNR of 14dB, a packet delivery rate of 99.27%, and a
throughput of 0.98, while eavesdroppers at undesired loca-
tions get a much worse performance. For example, an eaves-
dropper at position 5 can only achieve a SNR of 1.6dB, a
packet delivery rate of 23.26%, and a throughput of 0.03.

00.010.020.030.0400.20.40.60.81Empirical CDF of varianceVariance  Auto−variance v1Auto−variance v2Cross−variance v12Cross−variance v21v12 after calibrationv21 after calibration014235670418329302In addition, even an eavesdroppers is located closer to the
transmitter than the receiver (e.g. position 4), its perfor-
mance is still quite limited (e.g., a SNR of 0.8dB, a packet
delivery rate of 13.70%, and a throughput of 0.02) due to
the poor jamming signal cancelation.

9. RELATED WORK

The proposed pinpoint system utilizes multiple antennas
to deliver the service data to desired locations. The ex-
isting Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) techniques
(e.g., [20] and [1]) also explore multiple antennas to achieve
high transmission eﬃciency. The antennas used in MIMO
systems can send same signals to enhance the reliability of
the data transmission (e.g., [20]), or diﬀerent signals to in-
crease the capacity of the wireless channel (e.g., [1]). With
the proliferation of beamforming techniques [2], multiple di-
rectional antennas have been recently integrated into MIMO
systems to grant the wireless accesses to diﬀerent users si-
multaneously. This technique is known as MU-MIMO. How-
ever, MIMO and MU-MIMO techniques do not aim to pin-
point service data to desired locations. For these techniques,
any user residing in the signal coverage range of the antennas
can hear the transmit data.

There exist two other recent papers that are relevant to
this one. The scheme proposed in [21] utilizes multiple di-
rectional antennas to deliver the service to desired locations.
Speciﬁcally, each antenna sends diﬀerent portion of an orig-
inal message, and thus this message can be reconstructed at
locations where transmit signals overlap each other. How-
ever, due to the lack of channel calibration, an attacker with
high-gain, directional antennas can still capture the transmit
signals to recover the original information, even if they are
not at the desired locations. The scheme presented in [22]
proposes to jam undesired locations to prevent illegal ac-
cesses to the conﬁdential data, whereas this paper provides
service to desired locations through jamming entanglement.
Both papers are complementary to each other.

10. CONCLUSION

In the paper, we propose the pinpoint waveforming sys-
tem to enable location-restricted service access control. To
design such a system, we create the channel calibration tech-
nique that compensates the channel distortion and enables
signals sent by diﬀerent transmitters to arrive at the desired
receiver with the same shapes. We also created the jamming
entanglement technique that introduces jamming signals to
signiﬁcantly reduce the SNR at the eavesdropper but raise
the SNR at the desired receiver. We develop a prototype
system using USRPs and the experiment evaluation results
validate the feasibility of the proposed system.

11. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is supported by the Army Research Oﬃce under
grant W911NF-14-1-0324, Florida Cyber Security Center,
and NSFC under grants U1401251 and 61373170.

12. REFERENCES
[1] A. Goldsmith. Wireless communications. Cambridge

university press., 2005.

[2] R. R. Choudhury, X. Yang, R. Ramanathan, and

N. H. Vaidya. Using directional antennas for medium

access control in ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of
the MobiCom ’02, 2002.

[3] F. Sivrikaya and B. Yener. Time synchronization in

sensor networks: a survey. Network, IEEE, 2004.

[4] J. E. Elson and D. Estrin. Time synchronization in
wireless sensor networks. PhD thesis, University of
California, Los Angeles, 2003.

[5] J. Elson, L. Girod, and D. Estrin. Fine-grained

network time synchronization using reference
broadcasts. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 2002.

[6] C. A. Balanis. Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design.

Wiley-Interscience, 2005.

[7] J. Proakis and M. Salehi. Digital Communications.

McGraw-Hill Education, 2007.

[8] M. Biguesh and A.B. Gershman. Training-based mimo
channel estimation: a study of estimator tradeoﬀs and
optimal training signals. Signal Processing, IEEE
Transactions on, 2006.

[9] S. Mathur, R. Miller, A. Varshavsky, W. Trappe, and

N. Mandayam. Proximate: proximity-based secure
pairing using ambient wireless signals. In Proceedings
of the MobiSys’11, 2011.

[10] M. K. Simon and M. S. Alouini. Digital

communication over fading channels. John Wiley
&amp; Sons, 2005.

[11] J. Salz and J.H. Winters. Eﬀect of fading correlation
on adaptive arrays in digital mobile radio. Vehicular
Technology, IEEE Transactions on, 1994.

[12] X. He, H. Dai, W. Shen, and P. Ning. Is link signature
dependable for wireless security? In INFOCOM, 2013
Proceedings IEEE, 2013.

[13] K. Yu and B. Ottersten. Models for mimo propagation

channels: a review. Wireless Communications and
Mobile Computing, 2002.

[14] J. S. Bendat and A. G. Piersol. Random data: analysis

and measurement procedures. John Wiley & Sons,
2011.

[15] C. Boyd and A. Mathuria. Protocols for authentication

and key establishment. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2003.

[16] H. Krawczyk, R. Canetti, and M. Bellare. HMAC:

Keyed-hashing for message authentication. RFC
Editor, 1997.

[17] Y. Liu, P. Ning, H. Dai, and A. Liu. Randomized

diﬀerential dsss: Jamming-resistant wireless broadcast
communication. In Proceedings of the INFOCOM’10,
2010.

[18] M. Strasser, C. P¨opper, and S. ˇCapkun. Eﬃcient

uncoordinated fhss anti-jamming communication. In
Proceedings of the MobiHoc’09, 2009.

[19] Gnu radio. http:

//gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki.

[20] A. Lozano and N. Jindal. Transmit diversity vs. spatial

multiplexing in modern mimo systems. Wireless
Communications, IEEE Transactions on, 2010.

[21] S. Sheth, A. Seshan and D. Wetherall. Geo-fencing:

Conﬁning wi-ﬁ coverage to physical boundaries.
Pervasive Computing, 2009.

[22] Y. S. Kim, P. Tague, H. Lee, and H. Kim. Carving

secure wi-ﬁ zones with defensive jamming. In
Proceedings of the ASIACCS ’12, 2012.

303