StreetSense: Effect of Bus Wi-Fi APs on Pedestrian 

Smartphone

Sehyun Bae 

Seoul National University1 
kbird@popeye.snu.ac.kr 

Jiyoung Kim 

Seoul National University 
beyondj@popeye.snu.ac.kr 

Daehyun Ban 

Samsung Electronics 

daehyun.ban@samsung.com 

Kyu-haeng Lee 

Seoul National University 
khlee@popeye.snu.ac.kr 

Dahyeon Han 

Seoul National University 

hann862@popeye.snu.ac.kr 

Sangsoon Lim 

Samsung Electronics 

ssoon.lim@samsung.com 

Woojin Park 

Samsung Electronics 

woojin1.park@samsung.com 

Chong-kwon Kim 

Seoul National University2 

ckim@snu.ac.kr 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
Recently,  we  have  received  a  growing  number  of  reports  that 
complain about poor and unstable internet connections at bus stops 
in metro Seoul. Careful analyses led us to conclude that Wi-Fi APs 
equipped on buses instigate the trouble. According to the ambitious 
free Wi-Fi expansion plan by the city of Seoul, public buses started 
to equip Wi-Fi APs. As buses with APs stop and go, they actualize 
intermittent connection opportunities to riders waiting at the bus 
stops. However, the connection durations are too short such that 
bus APs are a nuisance rather than a convenience. We collected the 
basic  statistics  such  as  AP  inter-arrival  and  sojourn  times  and 
measured link level performance metrics. We observed the effect 
of  frequent  frame  losses  on  the  TCP  congestion  control  and 
eventually  on  the  TCP  throughput.  We  also  measured  the 
performance of applications such as PLT (Page Load Time). The 
measurement results showed that passing APs are useful only for 
some applications in very limited situations while they are virtually 
useless and just irritations in many cases. We also discovered that 
poor Wi-Fi connections pervert MPTCP; MPTCP performs worse 
than the generic single path TCP over the LTE network. We expect 
that our results will be used as the reference data in redesigning Wi-
Fi  offloading  mechanisms  as  well  as  in  planning  and  deploying 
urban Wi-Fi networks. 

1This work has been done while the author was taking academic 
course  in  Seoul  National  University  under  support  by  Samsung 
Electronics. 
2This  work  has  been  done  while  the  author  was  with  Samsung 
Electronics. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
IMC’15, October 28-30, 2015, Tokyo, Japan 
© 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3848-6/15/10…$15.00 
DOI : http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2815675.2815715 

attributes;  C2.3 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
C.4  [Performance  of  Systems]:  Reliability,  availability,  and 
[Computer-
serviceability;  Performance 
Communication  Networks]:  Network  Operations-Public 
networks 
 
Keywords 
AP, WiFi, LTE, MPTCP, Smartphone, Bus 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Aided by rapid technology advancements, nomadic convenience, 
and  repeated  cost  reductions,  we  have  observed  widespread 
diffusion of Wi-Fi networks as one of most popular Internet access 
techniques. At the time of writing, more than 180 Million Wi-Fi 
APs are deployed worldwide [1]. Started as an indoor novelty that 
replaces  unwieldy  cables,  Wi-Fi  has  expanded  its  horizon  as 
outdoor  amenities  that  transform  urban  landscape.  Numerous 
grassroots movements to offer private Wi-Fi APs to the public as 
well as citywide or even nationwide campaigns to install free Wi-
Fi hotspots have been reported. For example, Google funded the 
municipal Wi-Fi network in Mountain View, CA [2] and NY City 
announced an ambitious plan to construct free Wi-Fi cities [3]. 
In addition to open and free Internet access, Wi-Fi networks have 
been  used  by cellular  network companies  as  a  traffic  offloading 
system.  The  demands  for  mobile  data  traffic  have  increased 
explosively and this tendency is expected to continue in the future 
[4].  Even  though  cellular  operators  keep  expanding  the  network 
infrastructure,  the  capacity  increments  failed  to  overtake  the 
demands that are estimated to explode at  a 69% annual growth rate. 
Because  Wi-Fi  network  construction  is  much  more  economical 
than cellular network and Wi-Fi can be easily set up without careful 
planning, operators multiply Wi-Fi hotspots to alleviate the data 
overloading  conditions  on  the  cellular  infrastructure.  Many 
operators  designate  Wi-Fi  as  the  default  connection;  when  both 
cellular and Wi-Fi are available, smartphones prefer to connect to 
Wi-Fi.  Aggregated  with  the  pricing  strategy  that  Wi-Fi  is 
complimentary  while  cellular  is  still  prohibitively  expensive, 
default  use  of  Wi-Fi  appeases  subscribers  also.  In  addition,  the 

347operators  installed  Wi-Fi  hotspots  at  locations  such  as  cafés, 
libraries,  subway  stations  and  other  gatherings  where  relative 
location of APs and subscribers are static. In static environments, 
Wi-Fi  hotspots  of  constrained  coverage  render  satisfactory 
performances.  
Wi-Fi  hotspots  are  now  being  deployed  to  moving  mass 
transportation  including  subway  trains  and  public  buses.  For 
example, the city of Seoul recently announced a plan that they will 
install Wi-Fi APs to every bus in Seoul such that passengers can 
access the Internet while on board [5]. Even before the ambitious 
plan rolled out, several metro Seoul buses have already started to 
be  geared  with  APs.  While  APs  on  bus  provide  convenience  to 
passengers,  they  inflict  unforeseen  side  effects  to  riders  and 
pedestrians at bus stops. As buses with APs make stops for a short 
duration to let passengers to get on/off, prioritized Wi-Fi provokes 
smartphones to switch connections from cellular networks to the 
APs. However the connection durations generally are less than 30 
seconds  which  is  too  short  for  finishing  transactions.  The 
passengers started to report poor Internet connections in 2014 when 
buses  started  to  equip  APs  and  the  number  of  complaints  to 
Samsung Electronics, a major smartphone supplier, has increased 
as the number of AP installed buses increase. Our quality assurance 
team  investigated  the  problem  and  discovered  that  the  APs  on 
passing buses are the root of the problem.  
Like many large cities in Asia, public transportation is the most 
popular means of mobility in Seoul. More than 5.8 million citizens 
ride buses daily and busy bus stops serve tens of scheduled regular 
bus routes. Some busy bus stops have fixed Wi-Fi APs but usually 
bus stops do not have fixed APs. While waiting for their buses, 
many riders (See Figure 1 that shows riders at a busy bus stop in 
Gangnam)  use  their  smartphones  surfing  the  Web,  watching 
streaming videos, etc. At a busy bus stop, several buses arrive every 
minute and it is not unusual to observe more than ten buses are 
queued for getting passengers on/off board. Normally, buses stay 
at  a  bus  stop  for  30~90  seconds  and  this  triggers  a  connection 
switch to the APs on passing buses. After a few, and sometimes no 
frame  transmissions,  currently  available  APs  disappear  and  new 
APs turn up. This pattern repeats and causes serious irritations to 
riders some of who are running time-critical jobs such as searching 
restaurants or reading electronic maps. 
This paper presents the measurement results that we have collected 
for three weeks in April 2015 at bus stops in Seoul. Busy bus stops 
serve more than 20 bus routes each of which has inter-service time 
between  5  to  10  minutes  during  rush  hour.  We  measured  basic 
statistics such as AP (= bus) inter-arrival time, sojourn time, signal 
strength changes in the time domain. We also measured TCP and 
UDP throughputs and analyzed how intermittent connections affect 
the rate adaptation at the MAC layer and congestion control at the 
TCP layer. Because user perceived QoEs (Quality of Experience) 
such as PLT (Page Load Time) and buffering rate might be more 
important  performance  metric  than  network  level  metrics,  we 
thoroughly investigate QoE metrics also. Finally, we investigated 
the  performance  of  MPTCP  that  use  both  cellular  network  and 
intermittent Wi-Fi connections. 
Our measurement results illuminated the adverse effects of poor 
and intermittent Wi-Fi connections. In most cases, the connection 
duration over bus Wi-Fi is less than 30 seconds. Only a handful of 
packets  can  be  transferred  during  the  short  connection  interval. 
Because  TCP  congestion  control  prevents  the  use  of  available 
bandwidth  instantly,  the  effect  of  the  short  connection  time 
amplifies at the TCP layer. Poor TCP performance is again directly 
translated to poor QoE (Quality of Experience) at the application 

domain. The PLT and download speed are two or three times worse 
than the LTE connections. The performance of MPTCP that spans 
over  both  LTE  and  Wi-Fi  is  particularly  discouraging;  its 
performance is about three times worse than the generic single path 
TCP over LTE networks. 
 
2.  RELATED WORK 
Wi-Fi networks have been widely deployed as the tether-less last 
mile  as  well  as supplementary  networks  offloading  cellular  data 
traffic. Several cities and municipals provided free Wi-Fi access in 
their communities [2, 3, 6]. [11] observed the Wi-Fi usage patterns 
in the Google’s Mountain View community network and identified 
three  usage  patterns  according  to  device  types  [11].  The  usage 
pattern  of  smartphones  is  characterized  by  the  shortest  session 
length and the least bandwidth use. However, as smartphones are 
rapidly  replacing  PCs[7],  the  usage  pattern  of  smartphones  may 
change also. 
[24,  19]  examined  the  feasibility  of  accessing  Wi-Fi  APs  from 
moving vehicles. These early studies – even though performed in 
synthetic environments with only one or a few APs – confirmed the 
possibility  of  dynamic  connections  to  Wi-Fi  APs  from  moving 
vehicles  and  triggered  numerous  further  investigations.  Early 
research efforts focused on measuring the performance of Wi-Fi 
connections  from  moving  vehicles  in  real-world  environments. 
Later the research is extended to Wi-Fi offloading. Particularly, an 
early  study  [13],  which  measured  the  performance  of  Wi-Fi 
connections from moving vehicles in a metropolitan area, revealed 
both  the  feasibility  and  the  limitation  of  Wi-Fi  accesses  from 
moving vehicles: the average connection time is 13 seconds and the 
bandwidth is 30 KB/s. 
The explosive growth of mobile data demands superimposed with 
the  confined  radio  spectrum  and  the  high  CAPEX  of  cellular 
infrastructure  prompted  cellular  companies  to  employ  Wi-Fi 
networks as a mobile traffic offloading system. The 3GPP standard 
includes  architectures  I-WLAN  [8]  and  IFOM  [9]  that  integrate 
cellular networks and Wi-Fi networks seamlessly. Wi-Fi offloading 
has been one of the most intensively studied topics handling both 
non-vehicle environments [20, 21] and vehicle moving cases[12]. 
Usually  Wi-Fi  offloading  attains  less  performance  gains  in 
vehicular  mobility  scenarios  than  in  stationary  or  slow  moving 
scenarios  due  to  more  dynamic  changes  in  channel  states  and 
shorter connection durations. [15, 25] provided technical overview 
and challenges of vehicular Wi-Fi offloading. 
[20] dealt with stationary and walking mobility scenarios with 100 
smartphone  users  in  metropolitan  areas.  They  showed  that  data 
offloading  yields  greater  performance  enhancement  in  static 
environments  than  vehicle  moving  cases.  However,  another 
study[21] with 200 students in a University campus well equipped 
with  Wi-Fi  hotspots  showed  the  limited  applicability  of  Wi-Fi 
offloading  due  to  the  fact  that  Wi-Fi  hotspots  are  optimized  for 
laptops rather than smartphones. 
[12] conducted an extensive performance study of Wi-Fi offloading 
in  three  cities  in  the  USA.  Their  results  showed  the  poor 
performance of Wi-Fi networks mainly due to limited availability. 
[17]  performed  a  direct  head-to-head  comparison  between  a  3G 
network and Wi-Fi network in a vehicular communication scenario 
in Long Island, NY. They discovered that 3G and Wi-Fi networks 
present  different  and  complementary  characteristics;  Cellular 
networks provide wide and stable coverage while Wi-Fi networks 
furnish intermittent but higher bandwidth. However, the improved 

348to  enhance 

researchers  proposed  mechanisms 

cellular  network  infrastructure  and  the  introduction  of  new 
techniques  such  as  LTE  and  LTE-A  might  change  the  technical 
landscape.  Several  studies  indicate  that  cellular  networks  offer 
throughput comparable to or even larger than Wi-Fi while Wi-Fi 
still maintains the shorter latency [15, 16]. 
Many 
the 
performance  of  Wi-Fi  offloading  for  fast  moving  vehicles.  [12] 
devised  a  fast  switching  mechanism  called  Wiffler  that  enables 
significant  performance  gains  for  delay  tolerant  traffic.    [26] 
proposed a mechanism that predicts the mobility of vehicles and 
performs data prefetching to projected hotspots to maximize Wi-Fi 
traffic  offloading  for  both  delay  sensitive  and  delay  tolerant 
applications.  ATOM  [22]  selects  Wi-Fi  or  cellular  interfaces 
intelligently  to  optimize  user  QoE.  Cedos  [23]  is  another 
mechanism that maximizes Wi-Fi use for delay tolerant traffic. 
Generalization  and  proliferation  of  Wi-Fi  networks  naturally 
triggered the adoption of MPTCP [18] in recent smartphones such 
as the Samsung Galaxy S6 [10]. [14] explored the performance of 
MPTCP with smartphones focusing on the impact of several factors 
such  as  flow  size,  rate/route  control  algorithms  and  path 
characteristics  on  the  performance.  Their  results  showed  that 
MPTCP  generally  improved  the  application  level  performance. 
Recently, extensive experiments [16] carried out in 167 countries 
over a 6-month period showed that MPTCP is good for elephants 
but  not  very  effective  for  short  flows  necessitating  clever 
mechanisms that adaptively select the best interface and optimal 
application of MPTCP. 
Unlike the previous studies that handled scenarios where vehicles 
move around stationary Wi-Fi APs, we study the performance of 
Wi-Fi  offloading  in  an  environment  where  stationary  subscriber 
accesses moving APs mounted on buses. Initially, we thought that 
these two environments are similar and expected similar results. 
However, further investigations showed that there are significant 
differences. Passengers in moving vehicles can use relatively long 
and  stable  Wi-Fi  connections  when  the  vehicles  stop  at  traffic 
signals.  On  the  other  hand,  subscribers  waiting  at  bus  stops  are 
encountered with APs that dynamically appear and are available 
only  for  short  durations  that  are  too  short  for  performing 
meaningful transactions. 
 
3.  EXPERIMENT ENVIRONMENT 
Figure 1 shows passengers waiting at a busy bus stop in Gangnam, 
Seoul.  Because  the  BIS  (Bus  Information  System)  informs  the 
expected  bus  arrival  times,  riders  know  their  waiting  times  and 
many run various smart phone applications such as web browsing, 
mobile massaging, video streaming and etc. Several large bus stops 
have fixed APs but many more do not have fixed APs. Even at bus 
stops with fixed APs, riders far from the fixed AP may find the APs 
on the bus near them provide stronger signals and they connect to 
a passing bus APs dynamically. 
Figure  2  shows  a  typical  network  model  employed  by  cellular 
operators.  Cellular  networks  are  carefully  planned  and  deployed 
such  that  most  subscribers  at  any  locations  receive  adequate 
performance. Operators also deployed expansive networks of fixed 
Wi-Fi  hotspots,  but  this  paper  concentrates  on  Wi-Fi  APs  on 
moving buses. KT (Korea Telecom), a major cellular operator in 
Korea, connects bus Wi-Fi APs to a P-GW via an LTE connection 
to  provision  large  bandwidth  and  quick  handovers  between 
heterogeneous networks. 

As mentioned earlier, we are focusing on how the Wi-Fi on moving 
buses affects the performance of riders waiting for buses. To do 
this,  we  have  conducted  extensive  measurements  at  tens  of 
different bus stops located in Seoul such as Gangnam, Yangjae, and 
Banpo  for  three  weeks.  We  use  Samsung  Galaxy  Note  3 
smartphones and laptops to capture the traffic. Note that Samsung 
Galaxy Note 3 has an 802.11n Wi-Fi interface. We collect BSSIDs 
of connected APs, RSSI, data rate, and throughput with measured 
time from both smartphone and laptop while downloading files. We 
use  the  Wireshark  packet  analyzer  on  laptop  computers  for  a 
detailed  inspection  of  packet  contents.  In  addition  to  basic 
performance metrics such as L2 level transmission rates, frame loss 
probabilities  and  L4  level  throughput,  we  measure  page  loading 
time  of  some  popular  web  sites  with  chrome  browser  on  the 
smartphones to examine the QoE(Quality of Experience). 
 

 
Figure 1. Passengers at a bus stop in Gangnam, Seoul 

  

Core Router/Switch

Internet 

P - GW 

MME

Edge Router/Switch 

S-GW

eNB

ACR

( b ) 

( a ) 

 
Figure 2. A simplified model of the network. Users can access 
the  Internet  via  both  LTE  (connection  (a))  and  Wi-Fi  LTE 
(connection (b)). Wi-Fi is the default network and subscribers 
prefer to connect to Wi-Fi if possible. 
 
4.  MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
Before  delving  into  performance  measurements, we  first  display 
some basic statistics to illustrate the dynamicity of bus arrivals and 
departures at bus stops in Seoul. We then examine the performance 
measures at various protocol layers. Particularly, we analyzed the 
effect of unstable Wi-Fi connections on the performance of rate 
adaptation at the  MAC  layer and  congestion control  at  the  TCP 
layer. 
 

3494.1  Basic Statistics 
The  important  factors  that  affect  the  performance  of  waiting 
passengers  include  the  arrival  frequency  of  APs,  their  signal 
strength,  sojourn  time,  and  the  number  of  simultaneous  users. 
Among  these  statistics,  the  inter-arrival  time  and  sojourn  time 
determine the dynamicity of Wi-Fi AP connection opportunities. 
Figure 3 illustrates the inter-arrival time and sojourn time at a bus 
stop in Gangnam. We only show the result measured at one stop 
because  inter-arrival  times  can  be  different  depending  on  the 
number of bus routes at the stop. The arrival time of an AP is the 
time when we first receive a beacon from the AP and sojourn time 
is the time between the first beacon and the last beacon. Note that 
buses  frequently  queued  up  for  a  long  line  (frequently  over  50 
meters)  and  some  buses  passed  the  observation  point  without 
stopping. In this case, we may fail to detect the APs. We identify 
APs by their MAC addresses. 

1 

0.8 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2 

0 

0 

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

300 

AP inter-arrival Time
Sojourn Time

350

400

Time [s] 

 
Figure 3.  Inter-arrival time and sojourn time of APs on buses 
at a bus stop. 
 
We can observe from the figure that the AP(=bus) inter-arrival time 
and the sojourn time are quite short: mean inter-arrival time and 
sojourn time are 22 seconds and 23 seconds, respectively. 
Figure 4 shows one exemplary measurement result displaying the 
RSSI  of  signals  from  bus  APs.  Signals  from  different  APs  are 
shown in different colors. Short inter-arrival time and sojourn time 
define the high dynamicity of Wi-Fi AP availability. First, short 
inter-arrival  and  sojourn  times  force  frequent  switches  between 
APs as well as between AP and LTE. Frequent switching incurs the 
switching overhead on mobile devices and also increases latency 
and  energy  consumption.  The  short  sojourn  times  can  inflict 
significant adverse effects also; TCP connections are set up and 
disconnected frequently, and short-lived TCP connections fail to 
fully  utilize  the  available  bandwidth  due  to  the  slow  start 
characteristics of the TCP congestion control mechanism. 
We argue that the Wi-Fi availability pattern at a bus stop is different 
from what we observed from moving vehicles. Moving vehicles 
usually pass APs on the streets unnoticed and access Wi-Fi APs 
mostly  when  they  stopped  for a  traffic  signal  or  at  bus  stations. 
Therefore, moving vehicles can realize the better utilization of Wi-
Fi networks than riders at bus stops. 
 
4.2  Link Layer and TCP Performance 
Figure 5 shows the changes in transmission rates at the data link 
layer (Figure 5.(a) and  (b)) and the TCP goodput (Figure 5.(c)) 
during an interval of (50, 230) of Figure 4. We use the same colors 
in  Figures  4  and  5  to  identify  APs.  During  this  period,  the 
smartphone  made  connections 
to  four  different  APs.  The 
connection  times  are  77,  20,  22,  and  25  seconds,  respectively. 

Many  smartphones  use  the  de  factor  standard  rate  adaptation 
scheme  called  ARF  (Automatic  Rate  Fallback)  or  its  variations. 
Except short durations in (80, 100), transmission rates change very 
dynamically. Note that ARF was not optimized for dynamic signal 
changes and short ephemeral connections that are the norm at bus 
stops. We believe this is not a problem particular to ARF; most of 
current rate adaptation schemes may not perform well in the bus 
stop environment. 

 
Figure 4. RSSI of signals from bus APs. We can observe that 28 
buses with AP arrived at the bus stop during the 30 minutes-
long observation period. Typically, a bus stops for less than 30 
seconds. Occasionally, when stuck by a traffic stop, a bus stays 
at more than 60 seconds (Observed at time points of 40 second, 
700 second, 1300 second and 1600 second). 
 
Figure 5 (c) and (d) show the throughput and congestion window 
size of a TCP connection. To measure TCP performance, we let the 
smartphone to download a movie file from our server. The average 
RTT of the connection is 564 msec. The first connection during (55, 
80) achieves the most TCP throughput while the last connection 
contributes virtually none. Let us examine the TCP throughput in 
an interval (50, 100). Most TCP throughput is achieved before the 
80  second  mark.  During  this  period,  congestion  window  size 
increases intermittently but steadily from the minimum to 250 KB. 
Even  though  the  link  layer  tries  to  transmit  frames  after  the  80 
second mark, most of them fail with virtually no TCP throughput. 
Note the stable uplink transmission rate in the (80, 100) interval 
does  not  guarantee  good  TCP  performance.  We  scrutinized  the 
packets captured by the Wireshark during the observation period. 
The associated Wi-Fi connection is disconnected at 80 second due 
to the bad channel quality and TCP finishes its session via RST 
after the timeout at 224 second.  
Two  short  connections  at  150  second  and  180  second  are  the 
examples  that  manifest  the  importance  of  connection  length  on   
TCP performance. Due to the short connection times, congestion 
window  size,  even  though  it  increases  up  to  50KB  from  the 
minimum, it fails to reach the maximum and bandwidth available 
for short durations is wasted. We also investigated the connection 
at the 200 second mark. Over this connection, TCP tries to continue 
the previous session with a new AP via TCP keep-alive, but the 
new connection is too unstable to re-initiate the TCP connection. 
 

(a) TX Rate (Uplink) 

 

3501400 
1200 
1000 

0 200 400 600 800 

50 

(b) TX Rate (Downlink) 

TCP 

70 

90 

110 

130 

Time [s]

150 

170 

190 

210

230

 

(c) TCP Throughput 

 

 

(d) Congestion Window Size 

Figure 5. One snapshot of wireless traces 

 
4.3  Comparison of TCP and UDP 
Performance 
In this section, we compare the throughputs of UDP and TCP. Since 
the IP addresses of the mobile devices and laptops change as their 
Wi-Fi connections are switched, it is very hard to measure the UDP 
throughput  on  a  downlink;  the  server  cannot  comprehend  the 
client’s  address.  For  this  reason,  we  measured  the  uplink 
throughput of UDP and compare it with that of TCP. Unlike the 
previous  set  of  measurements,  we  used  Iperf  to  generate  uplink 
traffic for both UDP and TCP. In particular, we mimicked CBR-
like traffic that transmits 1470 byte long packets to the server every 
0.5s and measured throughput at the server every one minute. 
Figure 6 shows the throughputs of UDP and TCP. We repeated the 
same experiment of uploading for 100 times. The throughput of 
UDP, as expected, is greater than that of TCP; 1.7Mbps for UDP, 
1.0Mbps for TCP on average. However, both TCP and UDP fail to 
utilize the Wi-Fi bandwidth fully. The maximum throughputs are 
only about 7Mbps and 5Mbps for UDP and TCP, respectively. 

4.4  Application Layer Performance 
User  perceived  performance  called  QoE(Quality  of  Experience) 
may  be  the  more  important  performance  measure  than  network 
level  performance.  Important  application  level  quality  metrics 
include  PLT  (Page  Load  Time),  page  loading  failure  rate  and 
latencies. 
We  measured  the  time  taken  to  load  the  YouTube  home  page 
(https://www.youtube.com/).  The  PLT  is  defined  to  be  the  time 
difference from when the request is submitted to finish time. Figure 
7 (a) compares the PLTs of two connections; one over the LTE 
network  and  another  over  the  Wi-Fi  network.  Over  the  LTE 
connection, web pages are loaded in less than 4 seconds in all trials 
and the variation is very small. However, over the Wi-Fi network, 
4 seconds of PLT is achieved only by 8% of trials. Because some 
trials require unusually long time, we define a trial as a failure if 
the web page loading does not finish in 75 seconds. The failure rate  
is 25%, and the median time of a successful page load is about 15 
seconds. 
Figure 7 (b) illustrates the page loading failure rates when Wi-Fi 
connections are used to download homepages of YouTube, Yahoo 
and Facebook, respectively. Again, we define a trial as a failure if 
it waits more than 75 seconds to load the homepage. The failure 
rates over the LTE networks are all zero. The YouTube homepage 
whose size is largest among the three experienced the largest failure 
rate. 
 

(a) PLT 

 

  

 

 

Figure 6. Throughputs of UDP and TCP 

(b) Page Loading failure Rate 

Figure 7. Application layer performance (a) PLTs of the 
 
YouTube.com homepage over LTE and Wi-Fi connections, 
 
(b) Page loading failure rate 
 

 

351intelligent 

 
4.5  MPTCP Performance 
MPTCP has been recently introduced to expedite TCP throughput 
using  multiple  connections.  Ubiquitous  availability  of  both  the 
cellular  network  and  Wi-Fi  network  triggered  the  adoption  of 
MPTCP  in  recent  smartphones.  Prior  performance  studies  of 
MPTCP  over  LTE  and  Wi-Fi  networks  confirmed  that  MPTCP 
improved  TCP  throughput,  especially  for  large  files.  The  prior 
work dealt with stable Wi-Fi networks. We posit that poor quality 
Wi-Fi, the norm at Seoul bus stops, may assert negative effects on 
MPTCP  unless 
load  balance  mechanisms  are 
accompanied.  
Figure  8  shows  that  the  apprehension  might  indeed  be true.  We 
compared the times to finish downloading a file of size 37.8MB in 
three different scenarios; a) a generic single path TCP over the LTE 
network, b) MPTCP over both LTE and Wi-Fi APs on buses, and 
c) MPTCP over LTE and stable Wi-Fi networks. We included the 
third case to highlight the effect of poor Wi-Fi connection quality 
on  the  performance  of  MPTCP.  The  download  time  of  MPTCP 
over  stable  APs  is  shortest,  re-confirming  the  prior  work  that 
MPTCP is effective for long files over stable networks. However, 
the advantage of MPTCP over the generic TCP is not as great as 
the previous studies. Note that Korean cellular network operator 
have invested heavily on LTE and LTE-A network constructions 
and their bandwidth is two or three times larger than that of stable 
Wi-Fi networks. This large performance discrepancy might be the 
reason why the advantage of MPTCP over generic TCP is reduced. 

 
Figure 8. The comparison of time to take download 37.8 MB 
file  through  LTE,  MPTCP  with  Aps  on  buses,  and  MPTCP 
with fixed APs 
 
Poor  Wi-Fi  connections  exert  a  significant  negative  effect  on 
MPTCP. We define a trial as a failure if it takes more than 130 
seconds  to  finish.  The  failure  rate  is  24%;  this  is  particularly 
unacceptable considering that the failure rate of generic TCP is zero. 
Also, the mean download time of successful trials is around two 
times larger than that of generic TCP. 
 
5.  CONCLUSION and FUTURE WORK 
While APs installed on buses provide convenient Internet accesses 
to the passengers on board, they can be a nuisance to riders and 
pedestrians at bus stops. The impact of this side effect has not been 
measured before and as far as we know this study is the first attempt 
for thorough investigation of the problem.  

Our measurement study carried out at bus stops in Seoul showed 
that the side effect of bus Wi-Fi APs is quite critical. APs on buses 
not  only  fail  to  provide  convenience  but  also  deteriorate  the 
performance  of  waiting  riders  significantly.  The  performance 
degradation seems to be amplified at upper layers such as TCP and 
application layers. 
The  results  may  indicate  the  necessity  to  re-address  the  prior 
principle  of  mobile  data  offloading;  use  Wi-Fi  as  the  default 
network. Instead of connecting to Wi-Fi networks blindly, a careful 
survey of the quality of the Wi-Fi connection should be performed. 
Also, to guarantee the proper performance of MPTCP, intelligent 
and dynamic load balancing to sub-flows might be required. 
 
6.  ACKNOWLEDGEMETNS 
We  are  grateful  to  the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their  valuable 
comments and feedback, which greatly improved the quality of the 
paper. 
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of 
Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIP) (No. 
NRF-2015R1A2A1A01007400) and by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion(IITP) grant funded by the 
Korea  government(MSIP)  (No.B0190-15-2017,  Resilient/Fault-
Tolerant  Autonomic  Networking  Based  on  Physicality, 
Relationship and Service Semantic of IoT Devices) 
 
7.  REFERENCES 
[1]  WiGLE: Wireless Network Mapping. Available: 

https://wigle.net/. 

[2]  Google Wi-Fi: Available: http://wifi.google.com/ 
[3]  ABC News. New York City Pay Phone Booths Noew Free 

WiFi Hotspots, 2012. 
http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/yorkcity-pay-phone-
booths-now-freewifi/story?id=16756016. 

[4]  Cisco Annual Reports. Available: http://www.cisco.com/ 
[5]  Money Today Korea. Available: http://news.mt.co.kr/.  
[6]  Tim Carmody, Wi-Not? South Korea's Seoul To Blanket The 

City With Free Wi-Fi, Fastcompany. Available: 
http://www.fastcompany.com/1760834/wi-not-south-koreas-
seoul-blanket-city-free-wi-fi. 

[7]  A Future Fueled by Phablets – Worldwide Phablet 

Shipments to Surpass Portable PCs in 2014 and Tablets by 
2015, According to IDC, Sep 2014,  
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25077914 
[8]  Mobility  between  3GPP  Wireless  Local  Area  Network 
(WLAN) interworking (I-WLAN) and 3GPP systems, 3GPP 
TS 24.327. 
Available: http://www.3gpp.org/dynareport/24327.htm 

[9]  IP flow mobility and seamless Wireless Local Area Network 
23.261.  Available: 

(WLAN) 
http://www.3gpp.org/dynareport/23261.htm 

offload, 

3GPP  TS 

[10] Samsung Galaxy S6. Available: 

http://www.samsung.com/us/explore/galaxy-s-6-features-
and-specs/. 

352[11] M. Afanasyev, T. Chen, G. M. Voelker, and A. C. Snoeren. 
Usage patterns in an urban wifi network. IEEE/ACM Trans. 
Netw., 18(5):1359–1372, Oct. 2010. 

[12] A.  Balasubramanian,  R.  Mahajan,  and  A.  Venkataramani. 
Augmenting mobile 3g using wifi. In Proceedings of the 8th 
International  Conference  on  Mobile  Systems,  Applications, 
and Services, MobiSys ’10, pages 209–222, New York, NY, 
USA, 2010. ACM. 

[13] V.  Bychkovsky,  B.  Hull,  A.  Miu,  H.  Balakrishnan,  and  S. 
Madden. A measurement study of vehicular internet access 
using  in  situ  wi-fi  networks.  In  Proceedings  of  the  12th 
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking, MobiCom ’06, pages 50–61, New York, NY, 
USA, 2006. ACM. 

[14] Y.-C.  Chen,  Y.-s.  Lim,  R.  J.  Gibbens,  E.  M.  Nahum,  R. 
Khalili,  and  D.  Towsley.  A  measurement-based  study  of 
multipath  tcp  performance  over  wireless  networks.  In 
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Internet Measurement 
Conference, IMC '13, pages 455-468, New York, NY, USA, 
2013. ACM. 

[15] N.  Cheng,  N.  Lu,  N.  Zhang,  X.  S.  Shen,  and  J.  W.  Mark. 
Vehicular  wifi  offloading:  Challenges  and  solutions. 
Vehicular Communications, 1(1):13-21, 2014. 

[16] S.  Deng,  R.  Netravali,  A.  Sivaraman,  and  H.  Balakrishnan. 
Wifi, lte, or both?: Measuring multi-homed wireless internet 
performance.  In  Proceedings  of  the  2014  Conference  on 
Internet Measurement Conference, IMC '14, pages 181-194, 
New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM. 

[17] P.  Deshpande,  X.  Hou,  and  S.  R.  Das.  Performance 
comparison of 3g and metro-scale wifi for vehicular network 
access.  In  Proceedings  of  the  10th  ACM  SIGCOMM 
Conference on Internet Measurement, IMC ’10, pages 301–
307, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. 

[18] A. Ford, C. Raiciu, M. Handley, S. Barre, J. Iyengar, et al. 
Architectural guidelines for multipath tcp development. IETF, 
Informational RFC, 6182:2070{1721, 2011. 

[19] P. Hui, A. Chaintreau, J. Scott, R. Gass, J. Crowcroft, and C. 
Diot.  Pocket  switched  networks  and  human  mobility  in 
conference environments. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM 
SIGCOMM Workshop on Delay-tolerant Networking, WDTN 
’05, pages 244–251, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM. 

[20] K.  Lee,  J.  Lee,  Y.  Yi,  I.  Rhee,  and  S.  Chong.  Mobile  data 
offloading: How much can wifi deliver? In Proceedings of the 
6th  International  COnference,  Co-NEXT  ’10,  pages  26:1–
26:12, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. 

[21] S. Liu and A. Striegel. Casting doubts on the viability of wifi 
offloading.  In  Proceedings  of  the  2012  ACM  SIGCOMM 
Workshop on Cellular Networks: Operations, Challenges, and 
Future  Design,  CellNet  ’12,  pages  25–30,  New  York,  NY, 
USA, 2012. ACM. 

[22] R. Mahindra, H. Viswanathan, K. Sundaresan, M. Y. Arslan, 
and S. Rangarajan. A practical traffic management system for 
integrated  lte-wifi  networks.  In  Proceedings  of  the  20th 
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking, MobiCom ’14, pages 189–200, New York, NY, 
USA, 2014. ACM. 

[23] Y. Moon, D. Kim, Y. Go, Y. Kim, Y. Yi, S. Chong, and K. 
Park. Practicalizing delay-tolerant mobile apps with cedos. In 
MobiSys. ACM, 2015 

[24] J. Ott and D. Kutscher. Drive-thru internet: IEEE 802.11b for 
”automobile”  users.  In  INFOCOM  2004.  Twenty-third 
AnnualJoint  Conference  of 
the  IEEE  Computer  and 
Communications  Societies,  volume  1,  pages  –373,  March 
2004. 

[25] A.  Sathiaseelan  and  J.  Crowcroft.  Internet  on  the  move: 
Challenges  and  solutions.  SIGCOMM  Comput.  Commun. 
Rev., 43(1):51–55, Jan. 2012. 

[26] V. A. Siris and D. Kalyvas. Enhancing mobile data offloading 
with mobility prediction and prefetching. In Proceedings of 
the Seventh ACM International Workshop on Mobility in the 
Evolving Internet Architecture, MobiArch ’12, pages 17–22, 
New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

353