Search + Seizure: The Effectiveness of Interventions on

SEO Campaigns

David Y. Wang Matthew Der Mohammad Karami†

Lawrence Saul Damon McCoy† Stefan Savage Geoffrey M. Voelker

University of California, San Diego

†
George Mason University

Abstract
Black hat search engine optimization (SEO), the practice of abu-
sively manipulating search results, is an enticing method to acquire
targeted user trafﬁc. In turn, a range of interventions—from mod-
ifying search results to seizing domains—are used to combat this
activity. In this paper, we examine the effectiveness of these inter-
ventions in the context of an understudied market niche, counterfeit
luxury goods. Using eight months of empirical crawled data, we
identify 52 distinct SEO campaigns, document how well they are
able to place search results for sixteen luxury brands, how this ca-
pability impacts the dynamics of their order volumes and how well
existing interventions undermine this business when employed.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Every new communications medium inevitably engenders a new
form of abuse — telephones led to unsolicited “robocalls”, email
begat spam, and so on. In turn, new mechanisms and policies are
invariably brought to bear to restrict such activities (e.g., spam ﬁl-
ters or, in the U.S., the national do-not-call registry). Today, one
of the most dynamic such conﬂicts is playing out in the medium of
online search.

In particular, as online marketing has become the leading mech-
anism by which sellers of goods and services engage potential con-
sumers online, search engines, such as Google and Bing, have be-
come the primary platform of this engagement. Because search en-
gine results are presented directly in response to user queries, they
offer the opportunity to precisely target consumers at the moment
of their interest. As a testament to this, search engines received
over $16B in revenue in 2012 (46% of the total online advertising
expenditures) for clicks on sponsored advertisements appearing in
their search engine result pages (SERPs) [29].

However, while criminal use of sponsored advertisements oc-
curs, the more fertile ground for abuse is the so-called “organic”
search results, which are unpaid. These results are generated and
ranked automatically based on the content and structure of the visi-
ble Web (e.g., based on the PageRank algorithm, the presence of
user-generated content, etc.) and produce far more click trafﬁc
than sponsored ads. Unsurprisingly, techniques for improving the
ranking of particular Web sites in these organic search results —

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC’14, November 5–7, 2014, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3213-2/14/11 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663716.2663738.

termed search engine optimization (SEO) — are extremely popu-
lar. While some SEO techniques are completely benign (e.g., key-
word friendly URLs), quite a few are actively abusive (e.g., the
use of compromised Web sites as “doorway” pages, “cloaking”,
farms of “back links”, etc.). As a result, such “black hat” SEO
campaigns are frequently able to poison search results so that one
or more highly-ranked results for key search terms will direct traf-
ﬁc to their sites. This trafﬁc can then be monetized by infecting
the user with malware [11, 14, 30], defrauding the user via phish-
ing [38], or through the marketing of counterfeit or illegal goods
(e.g., pharmaceuticals [25]).

In this paper, we focus on a range of such SEO campaigns that
are the principal means of marketing for organizations selling coun-
terfeit luxury and lifestyle fashion goods. To wit, at the time of this
writing, typing “cheap louis vuitton” into Google produces a list of
ten results. Fully seven of these are fraudulent and ultimately di-
rect user clicks to storefronts selling counterfeit knockoffs of Luis
Vuitton products. This is no exception and similar search result
poisoning is evident for a range of luxury brand names. Indeed,
the combination of both high demand and high margins (a counter-
feit of a handbag that might retail for $2400 will sell for $250, but
will typically cost as little as $20 to produce) make this a vibrant
and proﬁtable scam; we have evidence that a single fulﬁllment or-
ganization delivered over 250,000 such items over a nine-month
period. However, such actors are not unopposed and there are a
range of interventions they must contend with including labeling
and deranking of their sites by search engine operators, and site or
domain takedowns driven by brand holders. It is understanding the
interplay of SEO campaigns and these interventions that motivates
our research.

Concretely, our paper makes three contributions. First, we pro-
vide the ﬁrst large-scale empirical characterization of SEO abuse
for luxury brands. In particular, we explain how such scams work
(identifying how they differ from existing markets technically and
operationally), analyze their search placement success over time
and, using the prior “purchase pair” technique [16], gather indica-
tors of order ﬂow volumes. Second, we develop a methodology for
using this data to evaluate the impact of interventions on the effec-
tiveness of these SEO campaigns. Finally, we apply our methodol-
ogy to a range of existing anti-counterfeiting actions, identify why
these prior efforts have had limited impact and make suggestions
for improving their utility in the future.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We begin
by describing the background of search engine optimization and
prior research in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe the technical
details of how SEO campaigns are structured in the counterfeit lux-
ury market as well as how current interventions by search engines
and brand holders operate and the rationale behind them. Section 4
describes our data set and data collection methodology. Finally,

359in Section 5 we present our ﬁndings and their implications, while
summarizing the most signiﬁcant in the conclusion.

2. BACKGROUND

The term search engine optimization (SEO) covers a broad ar-
ray of techniques, all designed to improve the ranking of organic
search results in popular search engines. Given that the goal of
search engines is to provide high-quality results, only the subset of
these techniques that explicitly aid in search quality are viewed as
benign by search companies. For example, in their “Search Engine
Optimization Starter Guide”, Google suggests things such as us-
ing accurate page titles and the use of the “description” meta tag,
which Google’s ranking algorithms view positively [8]. However,
these benign techniques do not change the underlying Web link
structure, and are insufﬁcient to produce the large-scale changes in
rankings required to capture signiﬁcant trafﬁc for popular queries.
Thus, “black hat” SEO campaigns will typically orchestrate thou-
sands of Web sites operating in unison to achieve their goals. Each
site will present the targeted keywords when visited by a search en-
gine crawler.1 However, when a visitor arrives at such a site via a
targeted search, entirely different content will be revealed (this is
one case of a general technique called “cloaking”). This content
may be native to the site, may be proxied from a third site or, most
commonly, will arise from a redirection to the true site being ad-
vertised. The popularity of this third approach is why such sites are
commonly called “doorways” in the SEO vernacular. Doorways in
turn obtain high-ranking either by mimicking the structure of high
reputation sites (typically by creating backlinks to each other) or by
compromising existing sites and exploiting the positive reputation
that they have accrued with the search engine.

Poisoned search results (PSRs), or search results promoted by
an attacker using black hat SEO with the intent of surreptitiously
amassing user trafﬁc, have been studied for a decade, with one of
the best-known early empirical analyses due to Wang et al. [37].
More modern analyses have covered advances in detecting cloak-
ing and poisoning techniques [19, 22, 27, 35] as well as deeper
studies of the particular campaigns and their operational behav-
ior [15, 36]. These efforts, which identify a range of technical
behaviors implicated in abusive SEO, serve as the foundation for
our own measurement work. However, our goals differ consider-
ably from previous work as we are focused on understanding the
overall business enterprise and through this lens evaluate the efﬁ-
cacy of existing interventions. In this, our work is similar to prior
efforts to understand particular underground economies [16, 17, 18,
25, 34] and the economic issues surrounding various defenses and
interventions [3, 12, 20, 21, 24, 26].

However, the ecosystem around luxury SEO abuse is quite dis-
tinct from these others and, as we will show, there are large differ-
ences in the underlying techniques, business structure, stakeholders
and the kinds of interventions being practiced. Thus, we believe
that our ﬁndings both serve to advance our understanding of how
to best address search abuse, but also to expand our broader un-
derstanding about the interplay between technical countermeasures
and the structure of online criminal enterprises.

3. LUXURY SEO AND INTERVENTIONS

Abusive SEO campaigns, by deﬁnition, can victimize two groups,
users and search engine providers. The former because they may be
convinced to purchase goods or services that are of low quality or
1This is commonly done using the User-Agent string which self-
identiﬁes popular crawlers, but some SEO kits also include IP ad-
dress ranges they have associated with the major search engines.

illegal, the latter because their ability to provide high quality search
results is imperiled. However, within the niche of counterfeit lux-
ury goods another potential victim is the luxury brands themselves
(both in terms of lost potential sales and brand damage). Conse-
quently, in addition to interventions from search engines (driven by
general concerns about search quality), brands also drive interven-
tions to protect their economic interests. In this section we discuss
what makes this market distinct, both in terms of how counterfeit
luxury SEO campaign are structured and the kinds of interventions
used in response.
3.1 SEO Campaigns

The SEO campaigns funded by the counterfeit luxury goods mar-
ket operate similarly to other SEO campaigns (see [36] for one such
example), with a couple of noteworthy differences. First, they in-
troduce distinct cloaking and evasion techniques designed to un-
dermine existing defenses. Second, the businesses that ultimately
fund these campaigns appear to be organized differently than the
open afﬁliate marketing programs that have been endemic in prior
studies of underground economics (e.g., counterfeit pharmaceuti-
cals [25], software [24] or FakeAV [34]). We discuss each of these
in turn.

3.1.1 Cloaking
At its essence, cloaking refers to any mechanism for deliver-
ing different content to different user segments. For the purposes
of SEO, cloaking’s primary objective is to deceive search engines
by providing different content to the search engine crawler than to
users clicking on search results. For example, the most widely-used
cloaking technique, called redirect cloaking, arranges that search
engine crawlers (e.g., Googlebot) receive content crafted to rank
well for targeted query terms, while normal users who access the
site are instead redirected to another site hosting a particular scam
(e.g., a storefront selling counterfeit goods). In some cases, particu-
larly when the doorway is on a compromised site, a visitor will only
be redirected after arriving via a search results page. Otherwise,
the original legitimate site content is returned, enabling compro-
mised sites to remain compromised longer by appearing unchanged
to normal visitors.

However, cloaking is a violation of most search engine’s content
guidelines and, when such activity is discovered, the cloaked sites
are typically deranked automatically in search results. As with any
adversarial process, though, attackers adapt to new defenses.
In
contrast to cloaking techniques we have previously observed [35,
36], we have identiﬁed a new method of cloaking, which we call
iframe cloaking, which bypasses traditional means of detection.
In particular, iframe cloaking does not redirect the user and fre-
quently returns the same content to both search engines and users.2
Instead of redirecting a user to a landing store site, the store is sim-
ply loaded within an iframe element on top of the existing door-
way page content. Typically the iframe visually occupies the entire
height and width of the browser to provide the illusion that the user
is browsing the store (Figure 1 shows a simple example of iframe
cloaking using JavaScript). The JavaScript implementation is fre-
quently obfuscated to further complicate analysis and in some cases
the iframe itself is dynamically generated. Taken together, these
countermeasures require any detection mechanism to run a com-

2A complementary feature of iframe cloaking is that it reduces the
requirements for cloaking on compromised sites. Traditional cloak-
ing uses network features (e.g., IP address or user agent) to identify
crawlers, requiring specialized server side code. In contrast iframe
cloaking runs entirely on the client, relying on the assumption that
crawlers do not fully render pages at scale.

360Figure 1: An example of iframe cloaking where the same URL returns different content for different visitor types. Above, a user clicks
through a search result and loads a counterfeit Louis Vuitton store. While, below, a search engine crawler visits the same URL directly,
receiving a keyword-stuffed page because the crawler does not render the page. Our crawlers mimic both types of visits.

plete browser that evaluates JavaScript and fully renders a page (a
set of requirements that greatly increase the overhead of detection
at scale).3 We found the use of iframe cloaking to be pervasive
within the domain of counterfeit luxury, but a more comprehensive
study of the use of iframe cloaking for other domains remains an
open question.

3.1.2 Business structure
Traditionally, a broad range of online scams have been organized
around an afﬁliate marketing model in which an afﬁliate program
is responsible for creating site content, payment processing and
fulﬁllment, while individual afﬁliates are responsible for deliver-
ing the user to storefronts (e.g., via email spam, SEO, etc.). Core
to this business model is the notion that afﬁliates are independent
contractors agents paid on a commission basis, and thus afﬁliate
programs work to attract a diverse set of afﬁliates. This model is
commonly used today in a broad range of scams with a nexus in
Eastern Europe and Russia including pharmaceuticals, pirated soft-
ware, books, music and movies, herbal supplements, e-cigarettes,
term paper writing, fake anti-virus and so on [32].

However, there are many indications (albeit anecdotal) that the
structure of organizations in the counterfeit luxury market are dis-
tinct.4 First, the marketing portion of these scams can span both
an array of brands and types of merchandise. For example, from
inﬁltrating their command and control (C&C) infrastructure using
the same approach as described in previous work [36], we ﬁnd
a single SEO campaign may shill for over ninety distinct store-
fronts selling thirty distinct brands ranging from apparel (Aber-
crombie), luxury handbags (Louis Vuitton), and electronics (Beats
By Dre). Moreover, the same campaign will commonly host lo-

3Even after rendering a page, the ubiquity of iframes in online
advertising make distinguishing benign from malicious content a
challenge.
4There is a range of evidence suggesting that the big counterfeit
luxury organizations have a nexus in Asia, unlike the Eastern Eu-
ropean origin of many other scams. Our evidence includes the use
of Asian language comments in SEO kit source code, the choice of
Asian payment processors, fulﬁllment and order tracking from Asia
and direct experience interviewing an Asian programmer working
for one of these organizations. We surmise that a distinct cyber-
crime ecosystem has evolved separately in East Asia with its own
standard practices and behaviors.

calized sites catering to international markets (e.g., United King-
dom, Germany, Japan, and so forth). Unlike other kinds of coun-
terfeit sales, which centralize payment processing within the afﬁli-
ate program [16, 25, 34], we ﬁnd each counterfeit luxury storefront
allocates order numbers independently and engages directly with
payment processors (merchant identiﬁers exposed directly in the
HTML source on storefront pages allowed us to conﬁrm). Finally,
in the traditional afﬁliate program model, fulﬁllment is managed
internally by the program, but in our investigations we have found
at least one fulﬁllment site for luxury goods that appears to be de-
signed to support outside sales on an á la carte basis (i.e., the site is
designed to support wholesale ordering and allows each member to
track the order status of their customer’s shipments). Overall, we
suspect the counterfeit luxury ecosystem does not use an afﬁliate
program and instead the ecosystem is composed of several inde-
pendent advertisers (SEO campaigns) contracting with third parties
for fulﬁllment and payment processing.
3.2 Interventions

As we have observed, the two groups with natural incentives
to disrupt SEO campaigns targeting counterfeit luxury goods are
search engine providers and luxury brand holders. Search engines
maintain the value of their page views (and hence the pricing they
can charge for advertising) by providing consistently high quality
search results for their users. Thus, all major search engines have
active anti-abuse teams that try to reduce the amount of search spam
appearing in their results. When an SEO campaign is detected,
search engines attempt to disrupt the campaign by either demot-
ing their doorway pages in search results or even removing those
pages from the search index entirely. Brand holders have a far less
privileged technical position and they are neither able to analyze
the Web at scale nor directly inﬂuence search results. However,
as brand and trademark holders they have unique legal powers that
allow them to target particular pieces of infrastructure from SEO
campaigns. These two techniques, search and seizure, represent the
de facto standard methods of intervention against SEO campaigns,
with pressure applied at different strata in the business model.

Search Engine

3.2.1
In addition to allowing the search ranking algorithm to demote
doorways performing black hat SEO, search engines commonly

http://anonymized!http://anonymized!361have special handling for certain classes of malicious content. For
example, starting in 2008, Google’s Safe Browsing service (GSB)
has detected and blacklisted sites leading to malware or phishing
sites with the aim of preventing users from being defrauded through
search. GSB labels search results leading to malware or phishing
pages as malicious, appends the subtitle “This site may harm your
computer” to the result, and prevents the user from visiting the site
directly by loading an interstitial page rather than the page linked
to by the result.

In 2010, Google instituted a similar effort to detect compromised
Web sites and label them as hacked by similarly appending the sub-
title “This site may be hacked” in the result [9]. The motivation is to
curb the ability of compromised sites to reach unsuspecting users,
while simultaneously creating an incentive for innocent site owners
to discover their site has been compromised and clean it. In prin-
ciple, this notiﬁcation could undermine black hat SEO since users
may be wary to click on links with a warning label.

However, there are important differences between these two seem-
ingly similar efforts, which more likely reﬂect policy decisions
rather than technical limitations. First, contrary to malicious search
results, users can still click through hacked search results without
an interstitial page. Second, typically only the root of a site is la-
beled as hacked; e.g., while http://anonymized may be labeled
as a hacked site, http://anonymized/customize.php will not.
Unfortunately, often only the non-root search results are compro-
mised and redirect users, while the root search result is clean. In
Section 5.2 we examine the implications and limitations of these
policy decisions on search interventions against SEO campaigns.
3.2.2 Seizure
As the name suggests, seizures reﬂect the use of a legal process
to obtain control of an infringing site (typically by seizing their
domain name, but occasionally by seizing control of servers them-
selves) and either shut it down or, more commonly, replace it with
a seizure notiﬁcation page.
In the context of counterfeit luxury,
seizures prevent users from visiting seized domains, thereby hin-
dering the store’s ability to monetize trafﬁc. Although we have wit-
nessed brand holders performing seizures directly, typically they
contract with third party legal counsel or with companies who spe-
cialize in brand protection, such as MarkMonitor [23], OpSec Se-
curity [28] and Safenames [31], to police their brand.

However, there are signiﬁcant asymmetries in this approach. For
example, a new domain can be purchased for a few dollars, but
the cost to serve a legal process to seize it can cost 50–100 times
more. Similarly, while a new domain name can be allocated within
a few minutes and effectively SEO’ed in 24 hours [36], a seizure
ﬁrst requires ﬁnding the site, ﬁling a legal claim and then waiting
(from days to weeks) for the docket to be picked up by the federal
judge to whom the case has been assigned. Presumably to amor-
tize these costs, a manual review of court documents shows that
domain name seizures commonly occur in bulk (hundreds or thou-
sands at a time) and are not performed on a reactive basis. Finally,
it is worth noting that doorway sites based on compromised Web
servers present their own challenges since seizing the domain of an
innocent third party can carry liability. Thus, while brands some-
times seize doorway pages, it is more common for them to target
the storefront advertised. Section 5.3 explores these asymmetries
in greater depth.

4. DATA SETS

The basis of our study relies upon extensive crawls of Google
search results to discover poisoned search results that lead to coun-
terfeit storefront sites. We then use a combination of manual label-

Vertical
Abercrombie
Adidas
Beats by Dre
Clarisonic
Ed Hardy*
Golf
Isabel Marant
Louis Vuitton*
Moncler
Nike
Ralph Lauren
Sunglasses
Tiffany
Uggs*
Watches
Woolrich
Total

# PSRs
117,319
102,694
342,674
10,726
99,167
11,257
153,927
523,368
454,671
180,953
74,893
93,928
37,054
405,518
109,016
55,879
2,773,044

# Doorways
2,059
1,275
2,425
243
1,828
679
2,356
5,462
3,566
3,521
1,276
3,585
1,015
4,966
3,615
1,924
27,008

# Stores
786
462
506
148
648
318
1,150
1,246
912
1,141
648
1,269
432
1,015
1,470
888
7,484

# Campaigns
35
22
16
6
31
20
35
34
38
32
27
34
22
39
35
38
52

Table 1: A breakdown of the verticals monitored highlighting the
number of poisoned search results, doorways, stores, and cam-
paigns identiﬁed throughout the course of the study. Note that the
KEY campaign targeted all verticals except those with an ‘*’.

ing and supervised learning to map storefront sites into the different
SEO campaigns that promote them. On a subset of storefront sites,
we also use a combination of test orders and actual purchases to
reveal information about customer order volume and payment pro-
cessing. Finally, we crawl the site of a supplier to provide insight
into the scale of order fulﬁllment and high-level customer demo-
graphics. This section describes each of these efforts in detail.
4.1 Google Search Results

Our primary data set comes from daily crawls of Google search
results using a system that we previously developed for detecting
search cloaking [35]. Each day we issue queries to Google using
search terms targeted by counterfeit sites, crawl the sites listed in
the search results, and identify sites using cloaking as depicted in
Figure 1. We repeat this process for ﬁve months from November
13, 2013 through July 15, 2014.

In the rest of this section we deﬁne the notion of counterfeit
luxury verticals for organizing search queries, and describe our
methodology for selecting the search terms that comprise the ver-
ticals, the implementation of our crawlers and the information they
collect, and our heuristics for detecting counterfeit stores in poi-
soned search results.

Note that we search exclusively using Google for a couple of
reasons. In prior work we found that Google is the most heavily
targeted search engine by attackers performing search poisoning
and black hat SEO [35]. Furthermore, Google is the leading search
engine for the United States and many European countries, the pre-
eminent markets receiving counterfeit products (based on shipping
data from a large supplier as discussed in Section 4.5).

Search Terms

4.1.1
Any work measuring search results is biased towards the search
terms selected because the selected terms represent just a subset of
the entire search index. In our study, we monitor search results for
counterfeit luxury verticals, a set of search terms centered around
a single brand (e.g., Ralph Lauren) or a category composite of sev-
eral brands (e.g., Sunglasses is a composite of Oakley, Ray-Ban,
Christian Dior, etc.). For our study, each vertical consists of a static
set of 100 representative terms that we determined were targeted by
SEO campaigns.

362Due to the early prominence of the KEY campaign, a large SEO
botnet responsible for most of the PSRs manually observed in Sept-
ember 2013, we initially compiled terms for each of the 13 verti-
cals it targeted as listed in Table 1. Similarly, we followed the KEY
campaign’s approach in determining whether to center a verticals’
terms around a single brand or a composite. To select these terms
we extracted keywords from the URLs of the doorway pages of the
KEY campaign. For a given vertical, we manually queried Google
to ﬁnd ten KEY doorways redirecting to the same store selling coun-
terfeit merchandise (related to the vertical). Then we issued site
queries (e.g., “site:doorway.com”) for each doorway to collect all
search results originating from the doorway. And for each search
result we extracted search terms from the URL path (e.g., “cheap
beats by dre” from http://doorway.com/?key=cheap+beats+
by+dre) to assemble a large collection of terms. We then randomly
selected 100 unique terms as a representative set for each vertical.
To extend the scope of our study to other campaigns, we included
three additional verticals that we saw counterfeiters targeting: Ed
Hardy, Louis Vuitton, and Uggs. Since the KEY campaign does not
target these brands, we adopted a different approach in selecting
search terms by using Google Suggest, a keyword autocomplete
service. We ﬁrst fetched suggestions for a targeted brand (e.g.,
“Louis Vuitton wallet”). Then we recursively fetched suggestions
for the suggestions.
In addition, we fetched suggestions for the
concatenation of a commonly used adjective (e.g., cheap, new, on-
line, outlet, sale or store) and the brand name to form search strings
(e.g., “cheap Louis Vuitton”). From the combined set of these vari-
ous search strings, we randomly selected 100 unique strings as our
search set for each vertical.

To evaluate any bias introduced from these two different ap-
proaches, we take the ten original KEY verticals that are not com-
posites, generate alternate search terms using the Google Suggest
approach, and run the crawlers using those alternate terms for one
day on April 25, 2014. Among the ten verticals, we ﬁnd four out of
a thousand total terms overlap. Additionally, when comparing the
percentange of PSRs detected after crawling, for both classiﬁed and
unknown, and the distribution of PSRs associated to speciﬁc cam-
paigns, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant difference between results from the
original and alternate terms over the same time range. Despite us-
ing two different approaches for selecting search terms, in the end
we ﬁnd the same campaigns poisoning search results. This over-
lap highlights both the pervasiveness of these campaigns and the
representativeness of terms selected in spite of the KEY campaign’s
early inﬂuence on our methodology.

4.1.2 Crawling Search Results
For each search term, we query Google daily for the top 100
search results. For each search result, we crawl each page link
using an updated version of the Dagger cloaking detection system
from previous work [35]. Dagger uses heuristics to detect cloaking
by examining semantic differences between versions of the same
page fetched ﬁrst as a user and then as a search engine crawler
(distinguished by the User-Agent ﬁeld in the HTTP request).

A previous limitation of Dagger was that it did not render the
page and, as a consequence, did not follow JavaScript (JS) redi-
rects. Thus, we extended Dagger by rendering each cloaked search
result detected using HtmlUnit [13], essentially a headless browser
complete with a JavaScript interpreter. (Since rendering a page is
an expensive operation, we only render pages we detect as cloaked.)
To detect iframe cloaking (Section 3.1.1), we implemented a sec-
ond crawler, VanGogh. VanGogh also uses HtmlUnit to render
pages. To detect iframe cloaking, it identiﬁes any iframes attempt-
ing to occupy the entire page visually (hiding the original content).

Speciﬁcally, we classify pages as using iframe cloaking if they load
iframes where the height and width attributes are both either set to
100% or larger than 800 pixels.

And again, due to the high overhead of rendering pages, we only
crawl a subset of search results using VanGogh. In particular, for
each measurement we crawl at most three randomly selected pages
from the same doorway domain to reduce the crawling workload.
We further trim the workload by not crawling domains previously
seen and not detected as poisoned by either VanGogh or Dagger.
This approach has proved reasonable due to the low daily churn
in search results for each vertical (on average 1.84% newly seen
domains are found in search results each day).

Store Detection

4.1.3
Ultimately we want to identify counterfeit luxury storefronts ad-
vertised through PSRs. We detect stores by applying two heuris-
tics to the set of PSRs discovered from crawling. First, we inspect
cookies from each landing site (the page eventually loaded in a
user’s browser after redirection through the doorway page) to look
for cookies commonly used by counterfeit luxury storefronts such
as those related to payment processing (e.g., Realypay, Mallpay-
ment), e-commerce (e.g., Zen Cart, Magento), and Web analytics
(e.g., Ajstat, CNZZ). Second, we search for either of the substrings
“cart” or “checkout” on the landing pages. If either of the heuris-
tics succeed, we treat the landing site as a counterfeit luxury store
advertised through search poisoning. Note that this approach iden-
tiﬁes stores from the search results within a vertical irrespective
of brand. For example, we may identify a counterfeit Christian
Louboutin store within Louis Vuitton search results.

We validate our detection methodology by manually inspecting
sampled search results from three popular verticals, Beats By Dre,
Isabel, and Louis Vuitton. For each vertical, we randomly chose
three search terms, and compared the search results for those terms
from two measurements taken at least two months apart (e.g., one
from November 23, 2013 and one from February 24, 2014). In to-
tal we examined 1.8K search results and detected 532 storefronts
advertised using cloaked search results. Among these we found
no false positives (instances where a benign page is mistakenly la-
beled as a doorway to a storefront) and 21 (1.2%) false negatives
(instances where a doorway to a storefront is not labeled). These
results are reassuring because errors are likely skewed towards un-
derrepresenting the number of storefronts.
4.2 Campaign Identiﬁcation

Our targeted crawls of Google search results produce a large col-
lection of doorway pages and counterfeit storefronts. We know that
behind these thousands of doorways and storefronts lurk a much
smaller number of distinct SEO campaigns, and the goal of our
work is to understand the full ecosystem of campaigns operating in
this counterfeit luxury market rather than focus on a singular cam-
paign, e.g., the KEY campaign.

A brute-force approach to this understanding would require a
domain expert to examine each Web page in our collection and
use domain-speciﬁc heuristics to infer the SEO campaign behind it.
The manual labeling of Web pages, however, is a time-consuming
and laborious endeavor that does not scale well to the many thou-
sands of examples in our collection. Instead we take a statistical
approach, and the rest of this section describes an automated, data-
driven method to identify the SEO campaigns behind individual
doorway and storefront Web pages.

To build a statistical model, we need a data set of labeled exam-
ples. Though manual labeling is tedious, we created such a data
set by identifying the SEO campaigns behind a small subset of 491

363Web pages in our much larger collection of crawled results. From
this small data set, we learned a classiﬁer that mapped the remain-
ing thousands of doorway and storefront Web pages to the 52 SEO
campaigns for which we had manually labeled examples. The re-
sults of this analysis (discussed in later sections) provide a compre-
hensive understanding of the ecosystem of SEO campaigns in the
counterfeit luxury market.

Our classiﬁer makes its predictions by extracting textual features
of HTML content and analyzing the statistics of these features that
distinguish Web pages from different campaigns. The following
subsections describe the classiﬁer in more detail, focusing in par-
ticular on the individual stages of feature extraction, model estima-
tion, and model validation.

4.2.1 Feature Extraction
The premise of our statistical approach is that doorway and store-
front Web pages contain predictive signatures of the SEO cam-
paigns behind them. Motivated by previous work [2], we looked for
these signatures in their HTML source. We expect HTML-based
features to be predictive in this domain for two reasons: ﬁrst, be-
cause SEO campaigns use highly specialized strategies to manip-
ulate the search rankings of doorways [36], and second, because
campaigns often develop in-house templates for the large-scale de-
ployment of online storefronts (e.g., customized templates for Zen
Cart or Magento providing a certain look and feel).

To extract HTML features, we follow a conventional “bag-of-
words” approach.
In particular, we construct a dictionary of all
terms that appear in the HTML source code, and for each Web page,
we count the number of times that each term appears. In this way,
each Web page is represented as a sparse, high-dimensional vector
of feature counts. We implemented a custom bag-of-words feature
extractor based on tag-attribute-value triplets [5] for the Web pages
in our data set.

One might also expect to ﬁnd predictive signatures of SEO cam-
paigns in network-based features (e.g., IPv4 address blocks, ASes).
However, we found that such features were ill-suited to differenti-
ate SEO campaigns due to the growing popularity of shared hosting
and reverse proxying infrastructure (e.g., CloudFlare). Therefore,
after a brief period of experimentation, we did not pursue the use
of such features.

4.2.2 Model Estimation
We learned linear models of classiﬁcation from our data set of la-
beled examples. Speciﬁcally, we used the LIBLINEAR package [7]
to learn L1-regularized models of logistic regression. The L1-
regularization encourages sparse linear models in which the pre-
dictions of SEO campaigns are derived from only a handful of
HTML features. Thus the resulting models are highly interpretable:
for each campaign, the regularization serves to identify the most
strongly characteristic HTML features from the tens of thousands
of extracted ones.

We evaluated the predictive accuracy of the classiﬁer by per-
forming 10-fold cross-validation on the data set of labeled exam-
ples. The average accuracy on held-out data was 86.8% for multi-
way classiﬁcation of Web pages into 52 different SEO campaigns.
(Note that uniformly random predictions would have an accuracy
of 1/52 = 1.9%.) Our model’s high accuracy on held-on examples
gave us conﬁdence to classify the remaining (unlabeled) Web pages
that we collected from poisoned search results.

4.2.3 Model Validation and Reﬁnement
We used the above models, trained on a small subset of labeled
Web pages, to infer the SEO campaigns behind the remaining unla-

beled Web pages. To do so, we extracted HTML features from the
unlabeled Web pages and used the classiﬁers to predict the most
likely campaign behind each example. To validate these predic-
tions, we manually inspected additional subsets of unlabeled ex-
amples. This step can be done efﬁciently by ﬁrst validating the
top-ranked predictions for each SEO campaign (as reﬂected by the
probabilities that the logistic regressions attach to each prediction).
We brieﬂy describe how we validated the classiﬁer’s predictions
on unlabeled Web pages. Primarily we assume that distinct SEO
campaigns are unlikely to share certain infrastructure such as SEO
doorway pages and C&Cs, payment processing, and customer sup-
port. We also consider less robust indicators such as unique tem-
plates, WHOIS registrant, image hosting, and Web trafﬁc analytics
(e.g., 51.la, cnzz.com, statcounter.com, etc.).

A ﬁnal stage is to reﬁne the model, using the manually veriﬁed
predictions to expand the set of labeled Web pages, retraining the
classiﬁer on this expanded set, and repeating this process in rounds.
With each iteration of this process we obtain a more accurate classi-
ﬁer and also one with greater coverage of distinct SEO campaigns.
Though some manual labeling is unavoidable, this overall approach
(of repeated human-machine interaction) is far more efﬁcient than
a brute-force expert analysis.

4.3 Purchases

From previous work studying email spam advertising illicit phar-
maceutical and software storefronts [16, 20], we found that making
orders on sites can shed light on normally opaque facets of under-
ground businesses: order volume, payment processing, and order
fulﬁllment. This information serves two important roles. First, it
reveals the interplay between the various actors in the counterfeit
luxury ecosystem (SEO campaigns, payment processors, and sup-
pliers). Second, the estimated order volume serves as a vital metric
in measuring the effectiveness of interventions (e.g., does label-
ing doorway search results as “hacked” lead to lower campaign or-
der volume?). Similar to this prior work, we created test orders
on counterfeit stores to estimate their order volume over time, and
made actual purchases to reveal the payment processors used by
these storefronts and the quality of the merchandise they sell.

4.3.1 Order Volume
We use the “purchase pair” technique [16] to estimate the order
volume of individual stores over time. This technique exploits the
fact that stores use monotonically increasing order numbers, where
the difference between order numbers represents the total number
of orders created over the time delta between orders.

Note that stores give users an order number before processing
their credit cards, and users still have an opportunity to back out.
Therefore this metric represents an upper bound on orders placed
and overestimates the absolute number of orders at a given store.
However, it is still useful to quantify the rate at which orders are
created, as well as the changes in order rate over time when corre-
lated with interventions.

Using this technique, we created 1,408 orders from 290 stores
touching 24 distinct campaigns and 13 verticals, between Novem-
ber 29, 2013 and July 15, 2014. We created 343 orders by hand
and 1,065 orders using scripts. Operationally, for both manual and
automated orders, we visit each store using via TOR and create or-
ders at weekly intervals, and we limit orders to three per day per
campaign to reduce the chance of being detected by the store or
payment processor. We take the orders all the way to the payment
processing page, which requires credit card details, before ﬁnally
leaving the site. The order and customer information we provide

364(a) Abercrombie

(b) Beats By Dre

(c) Louis Vuitton

(d) Uggs

Figure 2: Stacked area plots attributing PSRs to speciﬁc SEO campaigns within the labeled vertical. The red area represents the percentage
penalized, either through search or seizure. The remainder of the areas represents active PSRs, where the ﬁlled areas are attributed to speciﬁc
campaigns and the unﬁlled area is the remainder unclassiﬁed.

are semantically consistent with real customers, but ﬁctional and
automatically generated [6].
4.3.2 Transactions
To shed light on payment processing and order fulﬁllment in the
counterfeit luxury ecosystem, we successfully placed product or-
ders from 16 unique stores covering 12 different campaigns. In to-
tal, we received 12 knock offs of low to medium quality, all shipped
from China. From the bank identiﬁcation numbers (BINs) in our
transactions, we found that our purchases were processed through
three banks (two in China, one in Korea). This concentration sug-
gests payment processing is another viable area for interventions as
in [24], but investigating such an intervention remains future work.
4.4 User Trafﬁc

As surveyed in Section 2 and described in depth in our previ-
ous study [36], SEO campaigns poison search results to acquire
user trafﬁc that can then be monetized through scams — in this
case, counterfeit luxury stores. The order volume data shows that
counterfeit luxury stores do successfully convert user trafﬁc into
sales, and indirectly measures an SEO campaign’s effectiveness in
attracting trafﬁc via PSRs.

For a small number of stores, we were also able to collect user
trafﬁc data that directly measures an SEO campaign’s effectiveness
in attracting customers to their stores. Speciﬁcally, we were able
to periodically collect AWStats data for 647 storefronts in 12 cam-
paigns. AWStats is a Web analytics tool [1] that uses a Web site’s
server logs to report aggregated visitor information (e.g., the num-
ber of visitors, visitor durations, visitor geolocations, referrers of
visitors, etc.). From our crawled data, we discovered that these
stores left their AWStats pages publicly accessible, and we were

able to fetch visitor data for each store by visiting the publicly ac-
cessible default AWStats URL (e.g., http://<site>/awstats/
awstats.pl?config=<site>).
4.5 Supply Side Shipments

To better understand the suppliers, customers, and operational
relationship among storefronts and suppliers, we collected longitu-
dinal shipment data from a supplier partnering with MSVALIDATE,
one of largest SEO campaigns peddling counterfeit Louis Vuitton.
We discovered the supplier site from the packing slip of two of
our purchases. Upon visiting the site, we noticed it contains a
scrolling list of fulﬁlled orders and a mechanism to lookup ship-
ping records for valid order numbers in bulk (20 orders at a time).
Each record contains a timestamp and information regarding cur-
rent location and delivery status.

Using this mechanism, we collected over 279K shipping records
for nine months of orders placed through the supplier between July
5, 2013 and March 28, 2014. In summary, 256K orders success-
fully reached their destination, 4K were seized at the source (China),
15K were seized at the destination, and of the delivered, 1,319 were
returned by the customer. From country data listed in the records,
the three largest destinations are the United States, Japan, and Aus-
tralia, with 90k, 57K, and 39K orders, respectively. If we combine
these with the countries from Western Europe (41K), these regions
account for over 81% of orders.

5. RESULTS

In this section we use our crawler data to characterize the ac-
tivities of SEO campaigns that use search to promote stores selling
counterfeit luxury goods, and we further use our order data to study

024681012% Search Results2013−122014−022014−042014−06unknownphp?p=keypenalized0102030% Search Results2013−122014−022014−042014−06unknownpaulsimonjsusmoonkisnewsorgkeypenalized010203040% Search Results2013−122014−022014−042014−06unknownmiscmoklelenorthfaceclv.0msvalidatepenalized010203040% Search Results2013−122014−022014−042014−06unknownmiscuggs.0msvalidatejsusbiglovepenalized365the effects of both search engine and domain seizure interventions
on these SEO activities.
In short, we ﬁnd instances where both
can have the desired effect of disrupting counterfeit sites, but they
need to be far more reactive in time and comprehensive in coverage
to undermine the entire ecosystem of SEO campaigns exploiting
search engines for customers.
5.1 Ecosystem

We start with classifying poisoned search results into campaigns,
how those campaigns target verticals, and what the PSRs reveal
about the operations of the campaigns.

In terms of raw data, we crawled search results for eight months
from November 13, 2013 through July 15, 2014 and detected 2.7M
PSRs, across all verticals, using 27K doorways from unique do-
mains and sending users to 7,404 different stores selling counter-
feit luxury merchandise. Applying the classiﬁer described in Sec-
tion 4.2 to this data, we identiﬁed 52 distinct SEO campaigns that
account for 828 stores, 11K doorway domains, and 1.6M PSRs.
Table 2 lists the campaigns using a name we derived from a pat-
tern in their URLs, the domain names used for their C&C, or some
other telltale aspect of their operation. For each campaign, the table
lists the number of doorway domains, storefronts, and brands tar-
geted. Note that, although we ascribed more than half (58%) of all
PSRs to their respective campaigns, these PSRs only account for
11% of all stores. This disparity suggests that the ecosystem has
a skewed distribution where a handful of large campaigns account
for the majority share of PSRs that redirect users to a concentrated
set of storefronts.

From the perspective of brands, we attributed 16% to 69% of
PSRs in each vertical to known campaigns. Figure 2 visualizes
our classiﬁcation results for four verticals: Abercrombie (64.2% of
PSRs classiﬁed to campaigns), Beats By Dre (62.2%), Louis Vuit-
ton (66%), and Uggs (58%). We chose these verticals for their di-
versity in merchandise, campaigns, and search term selection meth-
odology. For each vertical, the ﬁlled areas in the stacked area plots
show the fraction of search results poisoned by the major cam-
paigns targeting the vertical; note that the “misc” label collapses
multiple campaigns into a single category to reduce clutter.

Each graph presents the PSRs detected, classiﬁed, and penalized
over time at the granularity of a day. For example, in Figure 2b
on December 1, 2013, 34.6% of search results for the Beats By
Dre vertical were poisoned. Of these PSRs, 85.3% redirect users to
counterfeit stores operated by ﬁve campaigns: KEY (16.8%), NEW-
SORG (53.8%), MOONKIS (5.8%), JSUS (8.0%), and PAULSIMON
(0.3%). The remaining 14.7% PSRs redirect users to counterfeit
stores we have yet to classify. The bottom shaded area shows that
just 0.6% are penalized either through Google labeling the search
result as “hacked” (Section 5.2.2) or a brand has seized the store-
front domain name (Section 5.3).

5.1.1 Verticals
Figure 3 shows the percentage of search results that were poi-
soned for each vertical as pairs of sparklines. Each sparkline is a
time series showing relative values over the ﬁve-month time span
of the study at the granularity of days. The left number is the min-
imum value across time and the right is the maximum (also shown
as dots on the line). Each column of lines shows the percentage
of PSRs among top 10 search results (left) or top 100 (right). For
example, in the Abercrombie vertical in the top left, at most 13%
of the top 10 search results in the vertical were poisoned, while at
least 2% were poisoned. The sparkline shows that the ﬁrst three
months were closer to the 13%, while the latter ﬁve months were
much lower.

Figure 3: Percentage of search results poisoned for each brand ver-
tical, shown as sparklines. Each sparkline is a daily time series
showing relative values over ﬁve months. The left number is the
minimum value across time and the right is the maximum (also
shown as dots on the line).

Overall, heavily targeted verticals are particularly vulnerable to
poisoned search results.
In 13 out of 16 verticals, about 5% of
search results are poisoned at some point in time. But for the ﬁve
verticals most vulnerable to search poisoning, at different points in
time 31–42% of the top 100 search results in those verticals were
poisoned. Also, as expected, it is easier in general to poison search
results from outside the top 10; Beats By Dre, for instance, had at
most 23% of its top 10 results poisoned while at one point 37% of
its top 100 results were poisoned.

Brands face multiple “adversaries”. Whether targeted by many
campaigns (14 and 17 for Louis Vuitton and Uggs, respectively) or
just a few (three and six for Abercrombie and Beats By Dre), all
verticals are targeted by multiple campaigns all competing to SEO
their doorway pages into search results to lure customers for their
counterfeit goods.

SEO Campaigns

5.1.2
SEO campaigns employ considerable infrastructure to maintain
their businesses. As shown in Table 2, SEO campaigns use hun-
dreds to thousands of doorway sites to redirect users to dozens of
storefronts (similar in scale to other abusive SEO botnets [36]). In-
terestingly, we do not ﬁnd a strong correlation between the num-

Top 101.7613.03GGAbercrombieTop 1001.9611.14GG0.127.80GGAdidas2.258.07GG2.2423.39GGBeats By Dre6.8136.50GG0.000.25GGClarisonic0.111.32GG0.0011.15GGEd Hardy0.4831.20GG0.000.35GGGolf0.261.28GG0.123.63GGIsabel Marant1.1911.02GG5.8820.55GGLouis Vuitton12.2637.30GG6.8939.58GGMoncler8.7942.45GG0.718.23GGNike5.0211.51GG0.233.74GGRalph Lauren1.735.00GG0.245.51GGSunglasses1.9511.48GG0.0010.22GGTiffany0.2317.10GG1.7017.99GGUggs6.9037.96GG0.711.87GGWatches3.897.04GG0.232.42GGWoolrich1.394.97GG366Campaign
171760
ADFLYID
BIGLOVE
BITLY
CAMPAIGN.02
CAMPAIGN.10
CAMPAIGN.12
CAMPAIGN.14
CAMPAIGN.15
CAMPAIGN.17
CHANEL.1
G2GMART
HACKEDLIVEZILLA
IFRAMEINJS
JAROKRAFKA
JSUS
KEY
LIVEZILLA
LV.0
LV.1
M10
MOKLELE
MOONKIS
MSVALIDATE
NEWSORG
NORTHFACEC
NYY
PAGERAND
PARTNER
PAULSIMON
PHP?P=
ROBERTPENNER
SCHEMA.ORG
SNOWFLASH
STYLESHEET
TIFFANY.0
UGGS.0
VERA

# Doorways
30
100
767
190
26
94
118
39
364
61
50
916
43
200
266
439
1,980
420
42
270
581
982
95
530
926
432
29
122
62
328
255
56
46
271
222
26
428
155

# Stores
14
18
92
40
4
18
5
8
10
8
10
28
49
2
55
59
97
33
3
12
35
15
7
98
7
2
14
7
9
33
55
7
17
14
9
1
6
38

# Brands
7
4
30
15
3
5
1
2
10
3
4
3
9
1
3
27
28
16
1
9
8
4
4
6
5
1
5
4
5
12
24
12
7
1
6
1
5
12

Peak
44
66
92
89
61
99
59
67
8
44
24
53
56
39
87
68
65
70
62
90
30
36
99
52
24
60
40
43
33
128
96
50
54
48
63
4
30
156

Table 2: Classiﬁed campaigns along with # doorways seen redi-
recting on behalf of a speciﬁc campaign, # stores monetizing trafﬁc
from the campaign, # brands whose trademarks are abused by the
campaign, and # days of peak poisoning duration, for campaigns
with 25+ doorways.

ber of doorways and the campaign’s efﬁcacy in poisoning search
results. For example, as shown in Figure 2b, MOONKIS poisoned
search results for Beats By Dre from the start of 2014 onwards with
95 doorways, while two larger campaigns, JSUS and NEWSORG,
used 439 and 926 doorways, respectively, in the same time period.
The operators of the campaigns successfully SEO their doorways
in concentrated time periods. Although we observe campaigns poi-
soning search results for multiple months, their SEO effectiveness
varies over time as exempliﬁed by the campaigns targeting Beats
By Dre in Figure 2b. To capture this notion of bursty SEO be-
havior, we compute a “peak range” for each campaign deﬁned as
the shortest contiguous time span that includes 60% or more of all
PSRs from the campaign. For example, NEWSORG’s peak range
lasts 24 days from November 23 to December 17, 2013, with a
daily average of 1676 PSRs during this span. Table 2 summarizes
the peak duration in terms of number of days for each campaign.
Using this metric, we ﬁnd campaigns run at their peak for 51.3 days
on average.

The campaign operators also run a diversiﬁed business that gives
them ﬂexibility in the face of disruption. A single campaign, for
example, will use its doorways to poison search results from multi-
ple verticals simultaneously. For instance, the MSVALIDATE and

BIGLOVE campaigns both successfully poison search results for
Louis Vuitton (Figure 2c) and Uggs (Figure 2d). As a result, cam-
paigns possess multiple revenue streams, giving them ﬂexibility
in the event a setback disrupts one revenue stream (e.g., domain
seizures from one brand, problems with a supplier for Beats By Dre
headphones, etc.). The campaign can adjust and continue monetiz-
ing trafﬁc by simply reallocating resources towards stores selling
counterfeit merchandise from other verticals.

Moreover, campaigns often operate multiple storefronts target-
ing the same vertical and selling the same merchandise. Sometimes
the goal is to localize for a market, such as a Japanese Uggs store-
front catering to Japanese consumers. More often, though, these
redundant stores can serve as backups in the event of interventions,
which we explore further in Section 5.3.
5.2 Search Engine Interventions

Since poisoned search results manipulate and degrade user ex-
perience, search engines have an incentive to identify and penalize
PSRs used by the SEO campaigns that lead users to counterfeit
sites. Two options available to search engines for reacting to PSRs
are to demote them in search rank, and to add warning labels to
search results to alert users before clicking through.

Search Result Demotion

5.2.1
Figure 4 shows the prevalence of poisoned search results for four
SEO campaigns over time, and the corresponding order activity at
storefront sites gleaned from creating test orders as described in
Section 4.3.1. The bottom two rows of graphs show the number of
PSRs per day for each SEO campaign: the lowest row focuses on
PSRs in just the top 10 search results, and the row above focuses
on the full top 100 search results. The dark portion of the bars at
the bottoms of the graphs corresponds to PSRs labeled by Google
as “hacked”.

The top two rows show the results of sampling order numbers
from a handful of representative stores promoted by each cam-
paign; the stores that are both visible in PSRs and have high or-
der activity relative to other stores from within the same campaign.
The top “Volume” row shows the actual samples over time for the
handful of representative stores and reﬂects the combined cumu-
lative volume of order numbers created (recall that these numbers
are an upper bound of actual orders made by customers). As an-
other way of looking at the same data, the lower “Rate” row shows
the order data as a histogram: we bin the number of estimated or-
ders per week, interpolating in regions where we lack samples. The
number at the top of each graph is the maximum value across the
time series.

In all four campaigns, we see correlation between PSR preva-
lence and order activity, which suggests that search penalizations
can be effective. This is most evidedent with the KEY campaign.
The rate of orders (slope of the line in the “volume” graph) de-
creases in mid-December, soon after its PSR activity drops pre-
cipitously. We do not know the actual cause of the drop in PSRs:
whether the KEY campaign stopped actively performing SEO on its
doorway sites, Google aggressively demoted its doorways in search
result rank, or the “hacked” warning added to its PSRs dissuaded
users from clicking on search results. However, it appears that the
penalization pressure from Google—demoting most of the PSRs
out of the top 100 and labeling half of the remaining as hacked—
did have an effect. From attempts to actually purchase items, the
stores promoted by the KEY campaign stopped processing orders
after the drop in PSRs.

Penalizing PSRs by demoting them in search rank follows the
conventional SEO wisdom that highly-ranked results are by far the

367Figure 4: Correlation between a store’s visibility in PSRs and order activity for four SEO campaigns. Each column of graphs is associated
with an SEO campaign. Bottom two rows of graphs depict the prevalence of PSRs among the top 100 and top 10 search results, respectively.
Top two rows reveal cumulative changes in sampled order numbers, as well as histograms binning order number changes into extrapolated
daily rates, respectively.

most valuable. On this topic, the bottom two rows of Figure 4
show the prevalence of PSRs in the top 10 and top 100 results.
For the most part, the shapes of both histograms are similar: cam-
paigns are successful in SEOing poisoned search results through-
out search page ranks, and it is difﬁcult to conclude whether order
volumes seen at stores are primarily due to the much smaller num-
ber in the top 10 or the much larger number across the top 100.
One example, though, suggests that there is value in having PSRs
across the full top 100. For the MOONKIS campaign, during most
of March 2014 it had negligible PSRs in the top 10 but hundreds in
the top 100. Nonetheless, order volumes seen at its stores remained
high and steady. In this instance at least, search rank penalization
would need to be even more aggressive to demote the PSRs from
the top 100.

5.2.2 Warning Labels
Google uses the “hacked” label on search results to warn users
about suspicious sites. This form of intervention faces two key
challenges—coverage and reaction time—and, based upon our cra-
wling results, overall appears to be ineffective for this type of abu-
sive SEO activity.

Although most doorways are hacked sites, Google only penalizes
2.5% of the PSRs we crawled with a “hacked” label. From the
perspective of brands, Figure 2 showed that penalized PSRs labeled
with the “hacked” warning were a small fraction of all PSRs at any

point in time for four large brand verticals. From the perspective
of campaigns, Figure 4 shows a similar result: except for the KEY
campaign, both the absolute number and fraction of penalized PSRs
are quite small.

One issue that undermines coverage is that Google only labels
the root of a Web site as “hacked”, and does not label search results
that link to sub-pages within the same root domain. In the PSR data
set, we found 68,193 “hacked” search results. When counting the
number of PSRs that share the same root as a penalized site, Google
could have labeled 102,104 search results (an additional 49%).

A second challenge is reaction time. A key metric of any reac-
tive intervention is the time delay between when a campaign starts
SEOing a doorway and when the search provider detects and pe-
nalizes the doorway with a label. This delta represents the window
of opportunity for an SEO campaign to monetize trafﬁc obtained
through PSRs without any warnings to users.

For doorways penalized with a label, campaigns have multiple
weeks in which to monetize trafﬁc through PSRs. Of the 1,282
“hacked” doorways in the PSRs data, 588 doorways were already
labeled when we ﬁrst saw them and we cannot determine when
they were ﬁrst labeled. The remaining 694 have lifetimes between
13–32 days on average until Google labeled them as “hacked”.

Note that the variance in the lifetime is due to the difﬁculty in
determining exactly when Google penalizes a site. Using crawled
search results, we know when we last saw a doorway prior to the

keyVolume132Rate5.80Top 1001943.00Top 10DecFebAprJun172.00moonkis127325.33645.00DecFebAprJun170.00vera174216.43357.00DecFebAprJun25.00php?p=210717.82389.66DecFebAprJun76.00368Company
Green, Burns, & Crain
SMGPA

# Cases
69
47

# Brands
17
11

# Seized
31,819
8,056

# Stores
214
76

# Classiﬁed Stores
40
20

# Campaigns
17
12

Table 3: Summary of domain seizures initiated by brand holders from Feb. 2012 – Jul. 2014, aggregating the following per seizing entity:
number of court cases initiating seizures (# Cases), number of brands protecting their trademarks through such cases (# Brands), and total
number of store domains seized as reported in cases (# Seized). For overlap with the eight months of our crawled data set (Nov. 2013 – Jul.
2014), we also list the subset of store domains seized and directly observed in our crawled PSRs (# Stores), the number of those stores we
classiﬁed into campaigns (# Classiﬁed Stores), and the number of SEO campaigns affected by seizures (# Campaigns).

penalty and when we ﬁrst saw a doorway after the penalty. How-
ever we cannot always determine when the penalty occurred be-
cause it may be the case the doorway does not appear in our results
for an extended period of time. As a result, we present two num-
bers, the smaller of which is the lifetime ending when we last saw
the doorway actively redirecting, while the larger number is the
lifetime when we ﬁrst observed the labeling.

5.2.3 User Trafﬁc
The correlation between search result visibility and order vol-
ume, observed in Figure 4, is an indirect measure of the ability
of campaigns to attract and convert trafﬁc via PSRs. Combin-
ing the AWStats data described in Section 4.4 with the crawled
data and test purchases, we are able to examine this relationship
in greater detail with a case study of a counterfeit Chanel store
run by the BIGLOVE campaign that rotates across three storefront
domains over time (cocoviphandbags.com, cocovipbags.com,
and cocolovebags.com).

As above, in Figure 5 we present both the prevalence of PSRs
attributable to this store and the corresponding extrapolated order
activity from June 10, 2014 to August 31, 2014. Using the AWStats
data, in the bottom-most graph we also present the daily user trafﬁc
seen by the store in terms of the number of HTML pages fetched
by users each day. We use color gradients in the PSRs and trafﬁc
graphs of Figure 5 to distinguish separate instances of coco*.com,
where each instance represents a different domain name used for
the storefront. As seen by the change in gradients, the BIGLOVE
campaign rotated domains for this storefront twice, at the end of
June and the middle of August, updating its doorways found in
PSRs to redirect to the new instances. We see similar changes in
trafﬁc coinciding with each of the domain name changes.

Although there is not sufﬁcient evidence to discern the cam-
paign’s intent, one possibility is that these domain name changes
are a proactive countermeasure against domain name seizures. As
discussed in Section 3.2.2, luxury brand holders frequently seize
domain names to curtail counterfeit sales. However, as we will
show in Section 5.3, SEO campaigns are well aware of the ongoing
seizures and oftentimes react within days of the initial seizure by
simply redirecting to another domain. And being proactive ensures
that there is no downtime: the ﬁrst domain cocoviphandbags.
com was seized on July 11, yet by that time the doorways were al-
ready redirecting users to the second domain cocovipbags.com.
Inspecting the detailed user trafﬁc data from AWStats, we make
rough estimates on conversion metrics from coco*.com that are
consistent with those reported by marketers [4]. During the months
of July and August 2014, coco*.com combined received 93,509
visits, 60% of which properly set the HTTP referrer header.5 Ex-
tracting the referrers reveals the complete set of doorways supply-

5The HTTP referrer header is not properly set in many situations,
including transitioning from HTTPS to HTTP, visiting through an
email client, visiting through a proxy that strips the header, or sim-
ply typing the URL directly into the browser.

Figure 5: A detailed example of the correlation between a store’s
prominence in search results (Top 100, Top 10), the resulting user
trafﬁc seen by the store (Trafﬁc), and the monetization of user traf-
ﬁc through orders (Volume, Rate), for a counterfeit Chanel store
run by the BIGLOVE campaign from June – September 2014. Each
color gradient in the PSRs and trafﬁc graphs is associated with sep-
arate instances of coco*.com, where each instance used a different
domain name.

ing trafﬁc for this store, and we ﬁnd 83 out of 174 doorway domains
(47.7%) were seen in our crawled PSRs data (recall that we limit
the number of terms we search for a given vertical, and so it is not
surprising that we do not capture all doorways). Examining user
visits more closely, we ﬁnd each visit generates 5.6 HTML page
fetches on average. And when combining the trafﬁc data with the
order data from test purchases, we estimate this store had a 0.7%
conversion rate, roughly a sale every 151 visits.

0442884Volumecoco*.com0714Rate0266531Top 10002958Top 10014K29KJunJulAugSepTraffic3695.3 Domain Seizure Interventions

As discussed in Section 3.2.2, brands have the most incentive for
undermining online counterfeiters, and a highly visible intervention
they can use is to seize the domains of counterfeit storefronts. With
this intervention, brands use legal means to seize domain names of
stores violating brand holder trademarks, thereby preventing users
from visiting sites selling counterfeit merchandise.6

We use two sources of data for studying domain seizure by brand
holders. The ﬁrst is the set of PSRs from our crawled search data.
Mechanistically, it is straightforward to determine whether a store
is seized by checking whether the site redirects users to a serving
notice provided by one of the third-party brand protection services
(e.g., Greer, Burns & Crain [10], SMGPA [33]) or the brand holders
themselves. The second is a set of seized domains listed in court
documents embedded in the serving notice pages; these documents
list all domains involved in a seizure, and enable us to obtain a
broader view of domain seizure activity by brand holders spanning
up to two years.

By extracting the brand holders and the timestamps from seizure
notices, we can also infer how brands use brand protection services.
For both GBC and SMGPA, we ﬁnd brand holders initiate domain
name seizures on a periodic basis, typically on the order of months
between rounds of seizures. Although a handful of brands seized
domains more frequently—Oakley issued 6 court cases at monthly
intervals, Uggs issued 19 court cases at bi-weekly intervals, and
Chanel issued 18 court cases also at bi-weekly intervals—they tend
to be the exception.

To assess the completeness of observing domain seizures using
PSRs, we compared the court cases seen in PSRs against ground
truth we collected by enumerating all court orders from GBC, which
are publicly available through their Web site. During the time frame
of our study (November 2013 to July 2014), we observe 47 cases in
PSRs out of the 50 total cases initiated by GBC (94%) during the
same time frame. This overlap indicates that our crawled search
data captures the bulk of seizure activity by brand holders.
5.3.1 Coverage
Brand holders have been aggressive in seizing storefront domains.
Table 3 shows a breakdown of seized domains across brands, store-
fronts, and campaigns. From manually examining the court docu-
ments embedded in seizure notice pages, brands arranged to have
almost 40,000 domains seized over two years. Speciﬁcally, while
representing 17 brand holders GBC seized 31K domains using 69
court orders from December 2012 to June 2014. Similarly, while
representing 11 brand holders SMGPA seized 8K domains using 47
court orders from February 2012 to July 2014.

Seizing domains can disrupt online counterfeit stores. For ex-
ample, Figure 6 shows order numbers over time for four stores pro-
moted by the PHP?P= campaign. The domain for its Abercrombie
UK store was seized on February 9, 2014 (vertical dotted line), and
its rate of new order numbers declined immediately (it did not stop
completely due to reaction by the SEO campaign, as discussed be-
low in Section 5.3.2).

Despite their aggressiveness, though, brand holders must be far
more aggressive when seizing domains. From the PSRs crawled,
we directly observed 290 seizures over our eight-month period:
214 seized by GBC and 76 by SMGPA. Compared with the total
number of storefronts we observed (7,484), though, these domain
seizures represent just a small percentage (3.9%) of stores used by
6Another option would be to seize doorway domains, but doing
so presents two obstacles: there are two orders of magnitude more
doorway domains than stores (Table 2), and the doorways are often
compromised sites.

Figure 6: Order number samples over time in early 2014 for the
PHP?P= campaign. Each curve corresponds to one of four inter-
national stores, where three sell Abercrombie (United Kingdom,
Germany) while the remaining sells Woolrich (Italy).

SEO campaigns. As a result, unless brands comprehensively seize
domains, stores promoted by SEO campaigns remain unaffected
and they continue to attract trafﬁc and customers via search. Refer-
ring back to the example in Figure 6, the orders remained steady at
other stores whose domains were not seized and the SEO campaign
remained effective overall.

5.3.2 Reaction Time
Even if brands eventually seize all storefront domains, though,
they take such a long time to seize domains, and attackers respond
so quickly to having domains seized, that the current environment
still strongly favors the attackers.

As with labeling sites as “hacked”, the time from when a store-
front goes live and when a brand seizes the store domain represents
the window of opportunity for a counterfeit store to monetize traf-
ﬁc. As in Section 5.2.2, we can compute the lifetime of seized
stores to measure their earning potential before seizure. We deﬁne
the lifetime of seized stores as the delta between the ﬁrst time that
the storefront appears in PSRs to the time the domain was seized.
We ﬁnd the average lifetime of seized stores lies between 58–68
days for GBC and 48–56 days for SMGPA. Again, due to the nature
of our data collection, we can only observe seizures when crawling
search results redirects our crawlers to seized stores. Therefore,
we cannot determine exactly when a seizure takes place. Instead,
we present two bounded numbers approximating the true lifetime.
The smaller is the duration ending when we last saw the store ac-
tively poisoning search results, while the larger is the lifetime end-
ing when we ﬁrst deﬁnitively observed the seizure.7

However, even when brands seize storefront domains, the SEO
campaigns possess backup domains in anticipation of such an inter-
vention and can quickly react to continue to monetize trafﬁc with-
out signiﬁcant interruption. Returning to the example in Figure 6,
when the Abercrombie UK domain was seized, the PHP?P= cam-
paign changed their doorways to forward to a new store domain
within 24 hours. This domain agility represents a critical weakness
of seizures: even though a store domain is seized, SEO campaigns

7Given how quickly campaigns react to domain seizures, it is also
possible for campaigns to redirect doorways to new store domains
faster than our crawler can detect that the initial domain was seized.

0200400600800Order #GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGFebMarAprMayGabercrombie[uk]abercrombie[de]hollister[uk]woolrich[de]370can easily modify their doorways to redirect users to their backups
rather than the seized domains.

Indeed, we found widespread evidence of attackers exploiting
this weakness as a countermeasure to domain seizures. Speciﬁcally,
of the 214 seized stores from GBC, 130 were redirected to new
stores (59 of which were subsequently seized) and, among the 76
seized from SMGPA, 57 were redirected to new stores (22 of which
were subsequently seized). These responses by the counterfeiters
happened on average within 7 and 15 days of the initial seizure,
respectively, for GBC and SMGPA. Such domain agility suggests
the counterfeiters are well prepared for domain seizures, and as a
result such interventions are not likely to undermine their business.

6. CONCLUSION

Online business in counterfeit luxury goods is brisk: from the
site of just one supplier, we saw over 250,000 successfully deliv-
ered orders in nine months. Such businesses prosper by poisoning
search results for popular luxury goods to attract customers to their
online storefronts; for heavily-targeted brands, a third of the top
100 search results are so poisoned for months at a time.

In this paper we presented techniques for detecting poisoned
search results that lead users to counterfeit stores, and a classiﬁ-
cation approach for mapping the Web sites of these stores into dis-
tinct SEO campaigns that promote these sites. From eight months
of crawled search results for 16 brand verticals, we detected 2.7
million PSRs using 27 thousand doorway pages that redirect users
to 7,484 storefronts, and classiﬁed over half of the PSRs into 52
distinct SEO campaigns. Simultaneously, we created test orders
on stores to sample their order number sequence space to estimate
their order volume over time.

Finally, we used our crawler and order data to study the effects
of both search engine and domain seizure interventions on these
abusive SEO activities. Although we ﬁnd instances where both can
have the desired effect of disrupting counterfeit sales activity, over-
all neither are currently employed with the level of coverage or
responsiveness necessary to be broadly effective against the actors
in this market. Search engines and brand holders should take into
account that these activities are organized as business campaigns,
that effective interventions should target their infrastructure at the
granularity of these campaigns, and that they are being targeted
by dozens of campaigns. Otherwise campaigns have shown great
agility in adapting to partial intervention, and in ﬁlling in gaps left
by the disappearance of other campaigns. We believe that the mea-
surement and classiﬁcation techniques we describe in this paper
for identifying campaigns and their infrastructure could provide the
improved targeting required for more robust intervention.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Aaron Hurtado and Kelsey Ma, supported by
the National Science Foundation Research Experience for Under-
graduates (REU) program, for scripting the process of gathering or-
der volume data. We also thank Andreas Haeberlen and the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable feedback. This work was sup-
ported in part by National Science Foundation grant NSF-1237264,
by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research MURI grant N00014-09-1-1081,
and by generous support from Yahoo, Google, Microsoft, and the
UCSD Center for Networked Systems (CNS).

8. REFERENCES
[1] AWStats — Free log ﬁle analyzer for advanced statistics

(GNU GPL). http://awstats.sourceforge.net/.

[2] BANNUR, S. N., SAUL, L. K., AND SAVAGE, S. Judging a
site by its content: learning the textual, structural, an d visual
features of malicious Web pages. In Proceedings of the ACM
Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security (AISEC)
(Chicago, IL, Oct. 2011).

[3] CHACHRA, N., MCCOY, D., SAVAGE, S., AND VOELKER,

G. M. Empirically Characterizing Domain Abuse and the
Revenue Impact of Blacklisting. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS)
(State College, PA., June 2014).

[4] CHAFFEY, D. Ecommerce conversion rates.

http://www.smartinsights.com/ecommerce/
ecommerce-analytics/
ecommerce-conversion-rates/, March 2014.

[5] DER, M. F., SAUL, L. K., SAVAGE, S., AND VOELKER,

G. M. Knock It Off: Proﬁling the Online Storefronts of
Counterfeit Merchandise. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD Conference (New York, NY, August 2014).
[6] Generate a Random Name — Fake Name Generator.

http://www.fakenamegenerator.com/.

[7] FAN, R. E., CHANG, K. W., HSIEH, C. J., WANG, X. R.,
AND LIN, C. J. LIBLINEAR: A Library for Large Linear
Classiﬁcation.
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/liblinear/.

[8] Google Search Engine Optimization Starter Guide.
http://www.google.com/webmasters/docs/
search-engine-optimization-starter-guide.pdf.

[9] GOOGLE. Results labeled “This site may be hacked”. http:

//support.google.com/websearch/answer/190597.

[10] GREER, BURNS, & CRAIN. Anti-counterfeiting legal

strategies, enforcement and remedies. http:
//gbclaw.net/practiceareas/anti-counterfeiting.

[11] GRIER, C., BALLARD, L., CABALLERO, J., CHACHRA,
N., DIETRICH, C. J., LEVCHENKO, K., MAVROMMATIS,
P., MCCOY, D., NAPPA, A., PITSILLIDIS, A., PROVOS,
N., RAFIQUE, M. Z., RAJAB, M. A., ROSSOW, C.,
THOMAS, K., PAXSON, V., SAVAGE, S., AND VOELKER,
G. M. Manufacturing Compromise: The Emergence of
Exploit-as-a-Service. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference
on Computer and Communications Security (Raleigh, NC,
October 2012).

[12] HERLEY, C., AND FLORENCIO, D. Nobody Sells Gold for

the Price of Silver: Dishonesty, Uncertainty and the
Underground Economy. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
the Economics of Information Security (WEIS) (London, UK,
June 2009).

[13] HtmlUnit — Welcome to HtmlUnit.

http://htmlunit.sourceforge.net/.

[14] INVERNIZZI, L., BENVENUTI, S., COVA, M.,

MILANI-COMPARETTI, P., KRUEGEL, C., AND VIGNA, G.
EvilSeed: A Guided Approach to Finding Malicious Web
Pages. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium and Security
and Privacy (San Francisco, CA, May 2012).

[15] JOHN, J. P., YU, F., XIE, Y., KRISHNAMURTHY, A., AND
ABADI, M. deSEO: Combating Search-Result Poisoning. In
Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium (San
Francisco, CA, August 2011).

[16] KANICH, C., WEAVER, N., MCCOY, D., HALVORSON, T.,
KREIBICH, C., LEVCHENKO, K., PAXSON, V., VOELKER,
G. M., AND SAVAGE, S. Show Me the Money:
Characterizing Spam-advertised Revenue. In Proceedings of
the USENIX Security Symposium (San Francisco, CA,
August 2011).

[17] KARAMI, M., GHAEMI, S., AND MCCOY, D. Folex: An

Analysis of an Herbal and Counterfeit Luxury Goods
Afﬁliate Program. In Proceesings of the eCrime Researchers
Summit (eCRS) (San Francisco, CA., September 2013).

[18] LEONTIADIS, N., MOORE, T., AND CHRISTIN, N. Pick

Your Poison: Pricing and Inventories at Unlicensed Online
Pharmacies. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce (Philadelphia, PA., June 2013).

371[19] LEONTIADIS, N., MOORE, T., AND CHRISTIN, N. A
Nearly Four-Year Longitudinal Study of Search-Engine
Poisoning. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (Scottsdale, AZ,
Nov. 2014).

[20] LEVCHENKO, K., PITSILLIDIS, A., CHACHRA, N.,

ENRIGHT, B., FÉLEGYHÁZI, M., GRIER, C., HALVORSON,
T., KANICH, C., KREIBICH, C., LIU, H., MCCOY, D.,
WEAVER, N., PAXSON, V., VOELKER, G. M., AND
SAVAGE, S. Click Trajectories: End-to-End Analysis of the
Spam Value Chain. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
and Security and Privacy (Oakland, CA, May 2011).

[21] LIU, H., LEVCHENKO, K., FELEGYHAZI, M., KREIBICH,

C., MAIER, G., VOELKER, G. M., AND SAVAGE, S. On the
Effects of Registrar-level Intervention. In Proceedings of the
USENIX Workshop on Large-scale Exploits and Emergent
Threats (LEET) (Boston, MA, March 2011).

[22] LU, L., PERDISCI, R., AND LEE, W. SURF: Detecting and

Measuring Search Poisoning. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(Chicago, IL, October 2011).

[23] MarkMonitor Brand Protection. https://www.

markmonitor.com/services/brand-protection.php.

[24] MCCOY, D., DHARMDASANI, H., KREIBICH, C.,

VOELKER, G. M., AND SAVAGE, S. Priceless: The Role of
Payments in Abuse-advertised Goods. In Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (Raleigh, NC, October 2012).

[25] MCCOY, D., PITSILLIDIS, A., JORDAN, G., WEAVER, N.,
KREIBICH, C., KREBS, B., VOELKER, G. M., SAVAGE, S.,
AND LEVCHENKO, K. PharmaLeaks: Understanding the
Business of Online Pharmaceutical Afﬁliate Programs. In
Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium (Bellevue,
WA, August 2012).

[26] MOORE, T., AND CLAYTON, R. The consequence of

non-cooperation in the ﬁght against phishing. In Proceesings
of the eCrime Researchers Summit (eCRS) (Atlanta, GA.,
October 2008).

[27] MOORE, T., LEONTIADIS, N., AND CHRISTIN, N. Fashion

Crimes: Trending-Term Exploitation on the Web. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (Chicago, IL, October 2011).

[28] OPSEC. Brand protection from manufacturing to retail.

http://www.opsecsecurity.com/brand-protection.

[29] PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS. IAB Internet Advertising

Revenue Report, 2012 Full Year Results.
http://www.iab.net/media/file/
IABInternetAdvertisingRevenueReportFY2012POSTED.
pdf.

[30] RAJAB, M. A., BALLARD, L., MARVROMMATIS, P.,

PROVOS, N., AND ZHAO, X. The Nocebo Effect on the
Web: An Analysis of Fake Anti-Virus Distribution. In
Proceedings of the USENIX Workshop on Large-scale
Exploits and Emergent Threats (LEET) (San Jose, CA, April
2010).

[31] SAFENAMES. Mark Protect. http://www.safenames.

net/BrandProtection/MarkProtect.aspx.

[32] SAMOSSEIKO, D. The Partnerka – What Is It, And Why

Should You Care? In Proceedings of the Virus Bulletin
Conference (September 2009).

[33] SMGPA. http://smgpa.net/.
[34] STONE-GROSS, B., ABMAN, R., KEMMERER, R.,

KRUEGEL, C., STEIGERWALD, D., AND VIGNA, G. The
Underground Economy of Fake Antivirus Software. In Proc.
of the 10th Workshop on the Economics of Information
Security (WEIS) (Washington D.C., 2011).

[35] WANG, D. Y., SAVAGE, S., AND VOELKER, G. M. Cloak

and Dagger: Dynamics of Web Search Cloaking. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (Chicago, IL, October 2011).

[36] WANG, D. Y., SAVAGE, S., AND VOELKER, G. M. Juice: A
Longitudinal Study of an SEO Campaign. In Proceedings of
the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium
(San Diego, CA, February 2013).

[37] WANG, Y.-M., MA, M., NIU, Y., AND CHEN, H. Spam

Double-Funnel: Connecting Web Spammers with
Advertisers. In Proceedings of the International World Wide
Web Conference (WWW) (Banff, Alberta, May 2007).

[38] WHITTAKER, C., RYNER, B., AND NAZIF, M. Large-Scale
Automatic Classiﬁcation of Phishing Pages. In Proceedings
of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium
(San Diego, CA, February 2010).

372