Peeking Behind the NAT:

An Empirical Study of Home Networks

Sarthak Grover, Mi Seon Park, Srikanth Sundaresan,

Sam Burnett, Hyojoon Kim, Bharath Ravi, Nick Feamster

School of Computer Science, Georgia Tech

ABSTRACT
We present the ﬁrst empirical study of home network availability,
infrastructure, and usage, using data collected from home networks
around the world.
In each home, we deploy a router with cus-
tom ﬁrmware to collect information about the availability of home
broadband network connectivity, the home network infrastructure
(including the wireless connectivity in each home network and the
number of devices connected to the network), and how people in
each home network use the network. Downtime is more frequent
and longer in developing countries—sometimes due to the network,
and in other cases because users simply turn off their home router.
We also ﬁnd that some portions of the wireless spectrum are ex-
tremely crowded, that diurnal patterns are more pronounced during
the week, and that most trafﬁc in home networks is exchanged over
a few connections to a small number of domains. Our study is both
a preliminary view into many home networks and an illustration of
how measurements from a home router can yield signiﬁcant infor-
mation about home networks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.3 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Network Opera-
tions—Network monitoring

General Terms
Measurement

Keywords
BISmark, Home Networks

1.

INTRODUCTION

Home broadband Internet access is ubiquitous and rapidly evolv-
ing. There are now upwards of one billion broadband Internet users
worldwide [1]; much of that usage is shifting away from conven-
tional desktops and towards mobile devices, such as laptops, smart
phones, and tablets [7]. Despite their pervasiveness, little is known
about most home networks or how people use them.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC’13, October 23–25, 2013, Barcelona, Spain.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1953-9/13/10 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2504730.2504736 .

377

Indeed, to date, it has been surprisingly difﬁcult to study home
networks on a large scale, because network technologies like net-
work address translators (NATs) present only an opaque view of
the home network to the global Internet—speciﬁcally, without a
monitoring device inside the home, trafﬁc coming from any device
in a home network appears to all be coming from a single device.
This coarse granularity of visibility makes it impossible to observe
the usage patterns of individual devices inside the home or observe
characteristics about other parts of a home network (e.g., the home
wireless network). Observing home networks on a large scale re-
quires developing—and deploying—an always-on monitoring de-
vice in the home that can capture information about individual de-
vices, with the consent of the people that live in these homes.

To better understand home networks, we developed BISmark, a
custom home router, and deployed it in more than 100 home net-
works in 21 countries around the world for more than one year.
BISmark sits between the user’s ISP access link and the rest of the
home network and acts as a continuous monitoring device; as a
result, it can observe all trafﬁc entering and leaving the home net-
work, and can attribute trafﬁc ﬂows to individual devices on the
network. This device, if permitted, can also log other types of ac-
tivity, such as the number of devices on the network at any given
time and the amount of trafﬁc that any particular device sends to
a destination (e.g., Google). It can also independently measure the
performance of both the home wireless network and the access link.
We study three aspects of home network usage:

1. Availability. How common are Internet connectivity outages
in homes, and how reasonable is it to assume continuous con-
nectivity?

2. Infrastructure. What networking technologies and devices

do people use in home networks?

3. Usage. Is the capacity of a home network sufﬁcient for the
growing demands of users and applications? How does us-
age differ across individual devices in the home? What other
patterns exist?

Although our study instruments a relatively small number of home
networks, it nevertheless offers extensive visibility into aspects of
homes that were previously opaque to researchers. Ultimately, reg-
ulators and Internet service providers may be able to use some of
the techniques that we describe to perform similar studies on a
larger scale. We believe that researchers, ISPs, policymakers, and
users can use the home router as a measurement device to better
understand various trends in availability, infrastructure, and usage.
Data about availability can help regulators determine whether ISPs
are delivering the service that they are promising to users. Data
about infrastructure (e.g., the amount of contention in the wireless
spectrum) can help ISPs better understand and debug user perfor-

mance, and can provide evidence for regulators to release more
spectrum when it becomes appropriate to do so. Information about
usage can help ISPs better provision and plan, and it can help device
designers better understand how (and when) people use various de-
vices.

The availability of home broadband access networks lets devel-
opers of applications running over edge networks understand the
connectivity conditions of a particular environment. Our study has
yielded some surprising ﬁndings. For example, although in the
Western world we often think of broadband connectivity as “al-
ways on”, we found examples in China and India where users only
power up their home network gateway when they intend to use it.
We found that trends of availability held in general: only 10% of
home networks in the developed world saw connectivity interrup-
tions of more than ten minutes more frequently than once every
10 days, but about 50% of home networks in developing countries
experienced such connectivity interruptions once every 3 days. Al-
though it is difﬁcult from our data set to ascertain the cause for
this intermittent connectivity (i.e., it could result from power out-
ages, poor connectivity, or behavioral patterns), it is clear that it is
not safe to assume that Internet connectivity is highly available in
certain parts of the world.

The infrastructure of home broadband access networks lets us
understand how users construct their home networks, and what
types of devices they comprise. We explore various questions relat-
ing to infrastructure, such as the number of devices on each home
network, and how the number of devices on these networks varies
over time with usage. We ﬁnd that in today’s home network, there
are more wireless devices than wired devices in general and this dif-
ference is greater in the developing countries. We also ﬁnd house-
holds in more developed countries tend to have more devices com-
pared to developing countries, and those devices are more likely to
remain continuously connected to the home router. Connectivity
shows a diurnal pattern across a week; the number of devices on
the network on weekdays typically peaks during evening hours, but
on weekends device usage is more consistent throughout the day.
The median number of devices on a 2.4 GHz network is about ﬁve,
whereas on the 5 GHz band, the median number of devices is two.
The usage of home broadband Internet access can shed light on
the applications and devices that people tend to use on their home
network, and the overall utilization of these networks. We analyze
the periodicity of usage patterns in various home networks and ob-
serve the extent to which users saturate their access link and ﬁnd
that most home networks are lightly used, and do not saturate their
downstream or upstream link most of the time. We analyze distri-
butions of device usage and ﬁnd that users normally have a subset
of devices that they prefer to use for consuming most network data.
We observe the diversity of domains visited and ﬁnd that about 38%
of the total volume of trafﬁc is from a single most popular domain,
among 200 whitelisted domains.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews
related work. Section 3 describes the process of collecting the vari-
ous types of data that we use in our study. Section 4 presents results
concerning the availability of broadband access in various home
networks around the world, including the duration of outages. Sec-
tion 5 describes the characteristics of the infrastructure in various
home networks, including the number of devices that are in the net-
work, whether the devices are connected via wired or wireless, and
to what extent devices occupy different ranges of radio spectrum
(e.g., 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz). Section 6 proﬁles the usage patterns of
users in different home wireless broadband networks and explores
how usage patterns differ across devices, and how download speed
affects usage patterns. Section 7 describes ongoing work and ex-

tensions to this study and discusses some broader implications of
our results. Section 8 concludes.
2. RELATED WORK

We brieﬂy review related work on home broadband networks.
We survey work that has performed “single shot” measurements of
home broadband network performance and characteristics, Internet
policy reports on performance in various regions, and qualitative
studies that lend insight into how to better design home networks.
Measuring home network performance. There has been signif-
icant interest in measuring home and access networks, and many
previous studies have tried to measure home networks in various
ways. The studies use various methods for measuring home net-
works, from running measurements remotely from servers in the
Internet to measure access link properties [18] to running tools on
end-host devices [14, 16, 17, 25, 26, 28]. In contrast to these previ-
ous studies, we perform our measurements from gateway routers,
not end-host devices, which enables continuous monitoring rather
than one-shot measurements. Such continuous monitoring allows
us to observe how usage patterns change over time, both on short
and long timescales, as well as to report on other characteristics
that require continuous monitoring, such as availability. Our work
builds on our own previous work [32], which uses a deployment
of custom home access points that conduct a unique set of perfor-
mance measurements. In contrast to our previous work, this study
broadly characterizes home network usage rather than focusing on
access link performance.
National and regional Internet policy and measurement re-
ports. Recently, there has been interest from national agencies
to measure home networks for Internet policy and regulation pur-
poses. The United States Federal Communications Commission,
United Kingdom’s Ofcom and the European Commission have all
conducted large scale studies of access networks in conjunction
with SamKnows [4–6]. Benkler et al. have a report on broadband
transitions and policies around the world [10]. To date, these stud-
ies from regulatory commissions have focused exclusively on per-
formance of the access network, rather than on properties of the
home network itself or usage of the home network. The primary
objective of such initiatives is to gain an understanding of access
networks to enact better policies. They do not perform passive
monitoring of the home network.
Qualitative design studies of home networks. There are previ-
ous studies on understanding home networks and attempts to de-
sign better systems [11, 15, 20, 21, 23, 27]. These previous studies
are qualitative: they rely exclusively on human subject interviews
and analysis on human interactions to identify problem areas and
to suggest better designs. We offer a quantitative complement to
these studies. We analyze passive measurement data that is auto-
matically collected and reported, which are in turn used to derive
meaningful observations about home networks that may not be ob-
vious or even revealed through studies with human subjects. The
automated nature of our data collection and monitoring allows us
to observe longitudinal behavior and usage patterns, and it may in
some cases result in more accurate data about human activity and
network usage, since many of the questions that previous studies
have asked in interviews could be more completely and accurately
addressed by measuring the network trafﬁc itself.

Previous studies have also built tools that improve interactivity
and aid troubleshooting in a home network environment, for ex-
ample measuring and displaying bandwidth usage and throughput
in a home network [13, 14]. Our work analyzes data from existing
networks, rather than trying to deploy new tools and observe how

378

Figure 1: The BISmark home router sits directly behind the modem in the
home network. It collects both active and passive measurements.

usage changes as a result of those tools. We analyze a wider variety
of network features, including wired vs. wireless usage, number of
active devices, diurnal patterns, and availability.
Behavioral studies of Internet usage in developing countries.
Chen et al. studied the effect of sporadic and slow connectivity on
user behavior and found a better Web interaction model for such
environments [12]. Wyche et al. performed a qualitative study of
how Kenyan Internet users adapt their usage behavior where Inter-
net connectivity is a scarce resource in terms of availability, cost,
and quality [33]. Smyth et al. performed a qualitative study on
sharing and consuming entertainment media on mobile phones in
urban India [31]. The data that we gathered in developing countries
could help corroborate some of these studies.

3. DATA COLLECTION

Home routers can observe many aspects of home networks be-
cause typically all other devices in the home communicate both to
each other and to the Internet via the router. Over the past three
years, we have deployed routers in 126 homes across 19 coun-
tries. Each router measures the quality of the upstream Internet
connection and collects limited information about device usage on
the home network. This section introduces the router platform, the
data we collect from the routers, and that data’s implications for
our study.
3.1 Collection Infrastructure

BISmark comprises gateways in the home, a centralized manage-
ment and data collection server, and several measurement servers.
We have instrumented the gateway with custom ﬁrmware that per-
forms both passive and active measurements. Where appropriate,
the ﬁrmware anonymizes certain aspects of the data before sending
them back to the central repository for further analysis. Figure 1
shows a typical deployment in the home network, and how BIS-
mark performs its measurements.
Firmware. BISmark is a custom home router ﬁrmware based on
OpenWrt for Netgear WNDR3800 and WNDR3700v2 routers [2,
3]. Routers have a 450 MHz MIPs processor, 16 MB of ﬂash stor-
age, 64 MB of RAM, an Atheros wireless chipset, one 802.11gn
radio, and one 802.11an radio. BISmark typically replaces a house-
hold’s wireless access point and connects directly to the cable or
DSL modem that provides Internet access to that household. Be-
cause the router sits on the path between the user’s home network
and the rest of the Internet, our software is uniquely positioned
to capture information about both the characteristics of network
connectivity and of home network usage (e.g., usage patterns, ap-
plications). We expected routers to remain powered on almost all
the time, since they provide the household’s Internet connectivity;
however, later in this paper we show that this assumption does not
hold in several countries and regions.
Recruiting and deployment. Our deployment of routers across
home networks has been organic: We have recruited most of our
users by word-of-mouth, or through targeted advertisements for

Figure 2: The BISmark deployment as of May 2013. Each dot indi-
cates a router. The green dots indicate routers that are currently report-
ing (156). Because we only use data from routers that consistently report
data throughout the period of our study, we use data from 126 routers in
19 countries. The red dots include the full set of routers that have ever
contributed data (295).

Developed
Canada
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Singapore
United States
Total Routers

Routers Developing
2
2
1
12
2
1
2
3
2
63
90

India
Pakistan
Malaysia
South Africa
Mexico
China
Brazil
Indonesia
Thailand

Total Routers

Routers
12
5
1
10
2
2
2
1
1

36

Table 1: Classiﬁcation of countries based on GDP per capita.

speciﬁc experiments and projects that we have run as part of our
research. For example, the router ﬁrmware performs continuous
measurements of the performance of the home access link, which
has garnered the attention of various policy and regulatory agen-
cies. We have also performed smaller recruitment efforts in various
areas for a usage cap management tool that we built on top of the
ﬁrmware [24]. Depending on the experiments that different users
have consented to (or not), we are able to collect different types
of information. Most users have remained actively engaged in our
experiments by virtue of the fact that they receive a free router as a
result of their participation.

We classify the countries where we have deployed routers into
two groups based on the GDP (Gross Domestic Product) per capita
ranking in year 2011 [9]. We call countries for whom the per capita
GDP falls within the top 50 developed; otherwise, we call them
developing. Table 1 summarizes this grouping.
3.2 Data

We now summarize the data we collected from the BISmark de-
ployment, then describe each data set in more detail. We will also
highlight some factors that limit the conclusions we can (or can-
not) draw from our data. Where possible, we have released the
data collected from this study; the Capacity data (described below)
is publicly available and is also continuously updated as the routers
collect new measurements.1 We have released all measurements
that do not have personally identifying information (PII) (i.e., ev-
erything except the Trafﬁc data set).2

1http://uploads.projectbismark.net
2http://data.gtnoise.net/bismark/imc2013/nat

379

DSL/CableModemBISmarkRouterHome NetworkNearby HostMLab Server(measurementlab.net)UpstreamISPClientClientDataset

Routers

Countries
Active measurements

Dates

Heartbeats
Capacity

Uptime
Devices
WiFi
Trafﬁc

126
126

113
113
93
25

19 October 1, 2012–April 15, 2013
19
April 1–April 15, 2013

Passive measurements

19
19
15
1

March 6–April 15, 2013
March 6–April 15, 2013
Nov. 1–Nov. 15, 2012
April 1–April 15, 2013

Table 2: Summary of data collected for this study. With the exception of
the Trafﬁc data set, which is subject to privacy restrictions, we will publicly
release all data used in this study.

Summary

3.2.1
Table 2 summarizes the data we collected from our deployment.
BISmark routers perform both active and passive measurements.
Many routers only collect performance measurements about the
router’s upstream Internet connection and basic diagnostic informa-
tion about the number of connected devices; these measurements
record no personally identifying information (PII) and, as a result,
do not require written consent.
In twenty-ﬁve homes where we
have explicit consent, we collect additional information about the
activity of users and devices on the home network; for those house-
holds we clearly explained the risks of PII exposure and obtained
written consent.3 Engineering and consent constraints dictated that
we collect the data sets over different time periods. We now explain
each data set in more detail.
3.2.2 Measurements

Heartbeats. Every router sends a “heartbeat” packet to the central
BISmark server approximately once a minute. We use this data
to measure router uptime. A heartbeat packet indicates that the
router is on and online, but a lost packet could mean a router is
powered off, ofﬂine, or has lossy connectivity to the server. These
heartbeats can be lost, and the router makes no attempt to retransmit
them. They are nonetheless frequent enough to provide reasonable
conﬁdence about the uptime of each BISmark router, which we
analyze in Section 4. We consider heartbeats from 126 routers that
were on for at least 25 days between October 2012 and April 2013.
Uptime. Starting in March of 2013, each router sends its uptime
every twelve hours. This data distinguishes, at coarse granularity,
between routers that are ofﬂine and those that are powered off.
Capacity. Every twelve hours, each router measures the capac-
ity of its access link using ShaperProbe [30]. In Section 6.2, we
jointly analyze the Capacity and Trafﬁc data to determine the extent
to which users fully utilize the capacity that their Internet service
provider offers.
Devices. Every hour, most routers count the number of devices
connected to their wired Ethernet ports and the number of associ-
ated clients on each wireless frequency. This data gives a broad
view of users’ device usage patterns, while still providing infor-
mation at a coarse enough granularity to preserve user privacy.
Section 5 uses this data to paint a broad picture of device usage
throughout the world.
WiFi. Some routers collect data about the number of other access
points (APs) in the vicinity. Each router only scans for other vis-
ible access points in the wireless channel that it is conﬁgured for;
3Our university’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) certiﬁed all as-
pects of our data collection and experiments.

by default, the 2.4 GHz radio is conﬁgured for channel 11, and the
5 GHz radio is conﬁgured for channel 36. Each router attempts to
scan for clients and access points every 10 minutes; unfortunately,
the scanning process can sometimes cause wireless clients to disas-
sociate from the router, so we reduce the scanning frequency if the
router has associated clients.
Trafﬁc. Because of potential privacy risks inherent in passively
collected data, only 53 households consented to contribute detailed
information about their devices and Internet activity. Of those, we
consider data from 25 households that were active from April 1 to
April 15 and exchanged at least 100 MB of trafﬁc. To encourage
users to consent to this data collection, we gave them access to a
Web interface that allowed them to observe and manage their us-
age over time and across devices; this feature turns out to be quite
useful for users who have Internet service plans with low data caps.
We collect four types of information:

1. Packet statistics. We collect the size and timestamp of every
packet relayed to and from the Internet. Although this data
seems fairly innocuous, trafﬁc analysis could in fact reveal
very detailed information about user activity.

2. Flow statistics. We collect obfuscated IP addresses and MAC
addresses, and application ports for a sample of Internet-
bound network ﬂows. At surface level, this data only reveals
the kinds of applications participants use on their Internet-
enabled devices (e.g., HTTP, SMTP), but inference attacks
similar to those on packet-level data are possible.

3. DNS responses. We collect a sample of A and CNAME
records and obfuscate domain names unless they appear on
a user-customizable whitelist of popular domain names; by
default, the whitelist is the 200 most popular domains in the
United States according to Alexa [8].

4. MAC addresses. We collect the MAC addresses of devices
connected to the router and anonymize the lower half of each
address, which allows us to identify manufacturers without
identifying speciﬁc devices.

This data provides rich insights into user behavior inside the home.
We quantify device ownership in Section 5.4 and characterize ser-
vice usage in Section 6.
3.3 Limitations
This section discusses various limitations of our data sets.
Data collection may be interrupted. Various outages and
failures—both of the routers themselves and of the collection
infrastructure—introduced interruptions in our collection. Al-
though we acknowledge that being able to collect all of our data
sets over the same overlapping time period would be ideal, we
needed to choose between using completely overlapping data sets
from smaller time intervals or using the largest time intervals pos-
sible for each data set. As such, we used overlapping time periods
where possible, and in other cases we used the largest possible time
interval.
It is difﬁcult to infer causes of downtime from Heartbeats. Al-
though we are interested in measuring availability with the Heart-
beats data, this data set really only indicates when the BISmark
router is both powered up and online. Using this data to infer ac-
cess link outages assumes that the BISmark router is always on,
but as we will see in subsequent sections, some instances of “out-
ages” are in fact users who power down the router for signiﬁcant
portions of the day. Additionally, these heartbeats are sent from

380

the BISmark routers to a server at Georgia Tech only, so a loss of
heartbeats might simply result from problems along the network
path between the BISmark router and Georgia Tech. We assume
that most persistent losses of heartbeats are due to either a failure
at the access network itself, or due to the router being powered
down; we are unable to distinguish these two cases. We started col-
lecting uptime data at 12-hour intervals, but this coarse granularity
means we can only conﬁrm network outages in cases where routers
are continuously powered on.
Privacy and ethics limit scalability. Although we would like to
observe all passive trafﬁc from the entire deployment, we are con-
strained by privacy and ethics concerns, which compel us to re-
strict the size of the Trafﬁc data set and anonymize the data in ways
that make certain types of analysis more difﬁcult. For this study,
we were only able to collect passive trafﬁc traces from 25 homes
in the United States; collecting these traces requires gaining insti-
tutional review board (IRB) approval, recruiting users who were
willing to let us collect such traces, and obtaining consent from
these users. Even for consenting users, we anonymize a signiﬁcant
portion of the passive trafﬁc traces: We anonymize trafﬁc to any
domain name that is not in the Alexa top 200 or otherwise explic-
itly whitelisted by the user, and hash the bottom 24 bits of all MAC
addresses. This anonymization prevents us from studying certain
types of questions, such as the characteristics of the “tail” of user
trafﬁc volumes.
Households are not a representative population sample. Be-
cause we wished to minimize both capital risk and technical sup-
port investment, our deployment is biased toward close friends,
family, colleagues, and technically-inclined volunteers in the
United States and abroad. This may limit the generality of our
results, particularly those drawn from only a few routers. Nonethe-
less, we believe our results shed light on important phenomena in
home networks that could be veriﬁed in later, more targeted deploy-
ments; indeed, our ongoing research and recruitment efforts follow
from data gathered on a smaller BISmark deployment.
BISmark enables its 5 GHz radio by default. Various countries
have restrictions on the use of wireless spectrum; the use of the
5 GHz spectrum on wireless routers is only permitted in certain
countries. For the most part, however, we do not disable the 5 GHz
radio before shipping a BISmark router, and any user who ﬂashes
their own router with the ﬁrmware that we have published on the
Web may have the 5 Ghz spectrum enabled by default. Therefore,
although it might be interesting to explore the use of 5 GHz spec-
trum in countries where it is not legal, the way that we have de-
ployed our routers necessarily biases our data set and does not al-
low us to answer this question accurately.
4. AVAILABILITY

We ﬁrst study the extent to which Internet connectivity was avail-
able across the home broadband networks in our deployment, and
whether any remarkable availability or usage patterns emerged. We
observe the frequency and duration of downtime across the deploy-
ment and the extent to which these characteristics differ between
home networks—we explore differences between developing and
developed countries (and speciﬁcally, how downtime characteris-
tics vary according to a country’s GDP), as well as usage patterns
that are unique to individual homes.

We measure the availability of Internet connectivity by recording
periodic heartbeat messages which every router sends to our cen-
tral server approximately once per minute. The arrival of a heart-
beat signiﬁes that the router is up and connected to the Internet. We

Developed countries experience far less frequent extended
downtime than developing countries: The median time be-
tween downtime in developed countries is more than a
month while in developing countries it is less than a day.

§4.1, Fig. 3

The two countries in our deployment with the most fre-
quent downtime are those with the lowest per-capita GDP
(India and Pakistan).

§4.1, Fig. 5

In some cases in developing countries, broadband connec-
tivity is not “always on” because users only turn on their
routers to use the Internet.

§4.2, Fig. 6b

Table 3: Highlights of Section 4 results.

Figure 3: Average number of downtimes per day that last at least ten min-
utes. Developed countries experience far fewer downtimes per day than
developing countries.

deﬁne downtime as any gap in the heartbeat logs that lasts longer
than ten minutes. The absence of a heartbeat could signify that the
router is ofﬂine, has been shut down or rebooted, or that the heart-
beat was lost. For reboots the router usually comes back up within
a few minutes. In some cases, we can positively verify downtimes
caused by powered off routers using the Uptime data set. All re-
sults in this section are based on the Heartbeats and Uptime data
sets, as described in Section 3. Table 3 summarizes a few of the
more interesting results.
4.1 How reliable is home broadband access?
We study the “uptime” of home broadband Internet access across
home networks in our deployment, in terms of the frequency and
duration of downtime. We also explore the extent to which these
characteristics vary by country.
Frequency of downtime. Figure 3 shows a distribution of the
downtime over six months, for both developed and developing
countries; we show a distribution of the average number of down-
times per day for each network, where downtime is deﬁned as an in-
terruption in connectivity of ten minutes or longer. As expected, the
home networks in developing countries sustain substantially more
downtime compared to those in developed countries. The median
duration between downtimes for networks in developed countries is
more than a month, whereas for developing countries, the median
duration between downtimes is less than a single day.
Duration of downtime. Figure 4 shows a cumulative distribution
function of the downtime durations for both developing and devel-
oped countries. The plot shows that the median downtime dura-

381

10−210−1100101Averagenumberofdowntimesperday0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFDevelopedDeveloping(a) This household never intentionally turns off its router, which is
typical of routers in developed countries.

Figure 4: Downtime duration for developing and developed countries. The
median downtime duration is similar, but as we see in Figure 3, developing
countries see downtime much more frequently.

(b) This household often turns off its router when not using it. The
router is available brieﬂy in evenings and during weekends.

(c) This household’s access link experienced sporadic ISP outages
for several days in April 2013. Although the router was continuously
powered on, we label this as downtime.

Figure 6: Examples of different modes of router availability. The thick
horizontal green lines indicate intervals when the router is available. For
reference, dark shaded regions indicate nighttime hours and lighter shaded
regions indicate weekend daylight hours.

4.2 Case Study: Router as Home Appliance

In addition to general trends, we also discovered some interest-
ing cases of availability and usage patterns. We observed that in the
United States, most users leave their routers powered on all of the
time. The median US user has his router on 98.25% of time in the
measured time period. Router availability in these homes resembles
Figure 6a. In contrast, home broadband is not “always on” in the
developing world. As a comparison, median routers in India and
South Africa stay on only for 76.01% and 85.57% of the time, re-
spectively. We observed cases where users powered their router on
for speciﬁc time periods when they were using the Internet, much
as someone would use any other appliance. We envision multiple
possible reasons for this disparity. One reason could be behavioral
patterns: in some cases, we can observe speciﬁc patterns where
users power down their router when they are not actively using it
(because of data usage caps imposed by certain ISPs). For example,
Figure 6b shows one Chinese household that consistently keeps its
router off except during the early evening. During the weekend,
the router is on for longer periods, presumably with increased ac-
tivity. Another reason could be poor connectivity, such as high loss
or network outages caused by congestion, overload, or even poor
infrastructure or equipment, as is possibly the case for the home
network in Figure 6c.

5.

INFRASTRUCTURE

This section examines the infrastructure that people in home net-
works use to access the Internet. We look at the typical composition
of devices in home networks, be they wired or wireless, and oper-

Figure 5: The median number of downtimes across homes in each country
during October 2012 – April 2013 vs. the GDP of the country where that
home network was located. The marker size is proportional to the median
downtime duration in that country. The vertical line separates developing
and developed countries. We show only countries with at least three routers
deployed.

tion is approximately 30 minutes, and that downtime in developing
countries tend to last longer. Downtime sometimes lasts several
days.
Downtime characteristics vs. per-capita GDP. Figure 5 shows
a scatter plot of the median number of downtimes experienced by
the per-capita GDP for that
home networks in each country vs.
country in U.S. dollar equivalent (i.e., the purchasing power par-
ity) [22] for countries with at least three deployed routers. The ver-
tical line divides nine developing from eleven developed countries.
Although there is no discernible difference between any of the de-
veloping and developed countries in terms of the median number
of downtimes, the two countries with the lowest per-capita GDP
in our deployment—India and Pakistan—experienced signiﬁcantly
more downtime during October 1, 2012 – April 15, 2013. A home
network in Pakistan experienced nearly two downtimes lasting at
least ten minutes every day.4

4These characteristics are are based on data from about 12 routers
in India and about ﬁve routers in Pakistan for October 1, 2012 –
April 15, 2013. In general, some country data from this scatter plot
may be inconclusive, due to the small number of countries from
which we collect data, but the trend appears to hold for at least the
poorest countries.

382

102103104105106107Downtimeduration(seconds)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFDevelopedDeveloping0100002000030000400005000060000GDP(PPP)percapita(InternationalDollars)020406080100120140160MediannumberofdowntimesNL(3)US(63)ZA(10)GB(12)IN(12)PK(5)3-314-24-44-64-84-10DateinEasternDaylightTime(EDT)2-222-242-262-283-23-43-63-83-10DateinChinaStandardTime(CST)3-314-24-44-64-84-10DateinEasternDaylightTime(EDT)Figure 7: Number of devices in each home network. More than half of the
homes have at least ﬁve devices. Each home network has seven devices on
average.

Figure 9: Average number of wireless devices connected at any given time
per spectrum with error bars showing the standard deviation. There are
signiﬁcantly more devices on 2.4 GHz than on 5 GHz.

In developed countries, 43% of home networks have at
least one always-on wired device; only 12% of home net-
works in developing countries have such as device.

§5.1, Tab. 5

The 2.4 GHz spectrum is signiﬁcantly more crowded; the
median number of devices seen on the 2.4 GHz spectrum
is ﬁve, whereas on the 5 GHz band, the median number of
devices is two.

The median number of access points seen from a home net-
work in developed countries is about 20; in contrast, home
networks in developing countries see a median of about two
access points

§5.3, Fig. 10

§5.3, Fig. 11

Table 4: Highlights of Section 5 results.

an example of a wired device that never disconnects from the router,
and a wireless VoIP phone is an example of an “always-on” wire-
less device. Some households may never turn off their desktop or
laptop. Although we do not explore the reasons for such connec-
tivity in depth, we assume that households in developing countries
tend to power off devices when not in use, possibly to minimize
electricity or data usage. Unexpected and frequent power outages
in these countries also affect device connectivity.
5.2 Wired or wireless?
More wireless than wired. Figure 8 shows the average number
of wired and wireless devices attached to (and associated with)
the home router over two weeks, measured hourly, for developed
and developing router groups. There are generally more wireless
devices than wired devices. Although this observation could re-
ﬂect limitations of the router, which has only four available wired
ports, the average number of wired ports used is less than one in
both groups; this shows that many households use wireless even
though wired connections generally provide better throughput, la-
tency, and stability. This result also conﬁrms the trend of moving
away from wired communication [7] and towards primarily using
wireless devices access the Internet. For many households, wire-
less technology has developed to the point where it is good enough
for day-to-day Internet usage, and wired communication has little
more to offer.

On the other hand, our results also suggest that wired devices
are still in fairly widespread use in some homes. Chetty et al.

Figure 8: Average number of devices connected to the access point at any
time with error bars showing the standard deviation. We see that there are
more wireless devices in both regions. Developed has more devices overall,
and an even greater number of wired devices.

ate either in the 2.4 GHz or the 5 GHz wireless spectrum. Table 4
summarizes the main results from this section.
5.1 How many devices?
More devices in developed countries. Figure 7 shows a CDF of
the number of devices seen in each home; twenty percent of net-
works had at least two unique devices, and more than half of homes
had at least ﬁve unique devices. Figure 8 details the number of de-
vices for developed and developing countries. Developed countries
have, on average, one more device connected to the access point
at any given time than developing countries. All in all, households
in countries with higher economic standards tend to have more de-
vices in their network, and this number is more pronounced for
wired devices. We assume this is because gaming consoles (e.g.,
XBox, Playstation, Wii) or entertainment devices (e.g., Apple TV,
Google TV, Squeezebox) are more common in developed countries.
More “always-connected” devices in developed countries. Ta-
ble 5 shows the number of households that have at least one wired
or wireless device that never disconnects from the home gateway
router for over ﬁve weeks and its percentage against the total num-
ber of households. The portion of households that have at least one
“always-connected” device in developing countries is signiﬁcantly
lower than for developed countries. Media entertainment boxes are

383

Group

developed
developing

Total
houses
79
34

Houses
with
always-connected
wired device
34 (43%)
4 (12%)

Houses
with
always-connected
wireless device
16 (20%)
4 (12%)

Table 5: Number of households that has one or more wired or wireless
device which never disconnects from the home gateway router for over ﬁve
weeks.

stated that home users still desire wired communication for reli-
ability, speed, and security [15]. Due to the physical constraint of
wired communication (i.e., cabling) devices using wired ports are
likely stationary ones such as desktop machines, network printers
or media entertainment gadgets like Apple TV. Even in homes with
wired devices, our analysis suggests that a typical home gateway
router could likely sufﬁce with only two ports. Surprisingly, only a
few households use all four Ethernet ports (9% for both developed
and developing countries).
5.3 How much is each spectrum used?

Spectrum contention is an important problem in home wireless
networks. Many devices talking to many access points in the vicin-
ity causes contention and interference problems, which in turn re-
duces the available bandwidth of the wireless channel. Our results
conﬁrm that the 2.4 GHz spectrum is quite crowded, especially
in developed countries, which could create bottlenecks as access
link throughputs continue to increase. The 5 GHz spectrum, on the
other hand, is less crowded (at least for now).
Wireless spectrum usage. Figure 9 shows that there are more de-
vices active on the 2.4 GHz spectrum than on the 5 GHz spectrum
at any given time. This phenomenon may result from the fact that
dual-band devices are more expensive, and single-band devices de-
fault to the more popular 2.4 GHz spectrum. Phones are equipped
almost exclusively with only 2.4 GHz radios. Figure 10 shows a
CDF of the total number of unique devices seen per household. We
see that the median number of devices on the 2.4 GHz spectrum is
ﬁve, while the median number of devices on the 5 GHz spectrum is
two.

We see a similar trend in the number of other access points seen
on both spectrums. The median number of other access points is
only about one device in the 5 GHz spectrum, while it is higher for
the 2.4 GHz spectrum, as expected. Figure 11 shows a CDF of the
total number of unique access points seen per household. Scanning
is done only in the channel the access point is conﬁgured in (chan-
nel 11 for 2.4 GHz by default, though the user can conﬁgure it), so
this does not tell us all the access points available, but it does tell
us how likely it is that interference occurs due to competing access
points. We see that the 2.4 GHz spectrum is more densely occupied
in developed countries, and interestingly, we see that there are two
modes in both sets; either there are very few access points in that
channel or there are a lot (more than ten in developed and more
than three in developing countries).
5.4 Which device vendors are most common?
For the 25 homes in the United States in the Trafﬁc data set, we
observed the frequency of various types of devices connected to the
home network. When collecting the Trafﬁc data set, we obfuscate
the bottom 24 bits of the MAC addresses of all devices seen by the
gateway. The ﬁrst 24 bits allow us to look up the manufacturer, and
though this does not always tell us if the device is a phone, tablet,
or laptop, it still provides us enough information to distinguish net-
work gateways from smart devices and wireless cards.

Figure 10: Number of unique devices seen on the two wireless spectrums.
The median is about ﬁve devices on 2.4 GHz and two devices on 5 GHz.

Figure 11: Number of access points seen on the 2.4 GHz spectrum in devel-
oped and developing countries. There are many more access points visible
in developed, where we see modal behavior with either very few or a lot of
neighboring access points.

Figure 12: The number of devices seen in the Devices data set across all
homes in the Trafﬁc data set (25 homes in the United States). We only
considered devices which transferred at least 100 KB.

Based on passive monitoring of 25 homes, Figure 12 plots the
device types seen in the Trafﬁc data set. We have removed all
references to Netgear originating from our BISmark routers. The
most common device was manufactured by Apple, followed by In-
tel. Other Samsung and smart phones were also reasonably com-

384

02468101214Devices0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF5GHz2.4GHz100101102AccessPoints0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFDevelopedDevelopingAppleODMIntelSmartPhoneSamsungGatewayAsusMisc.MicrosoftInternetTVGamingWirelessCardVoIPHewlett-PackardHardwareVMwareRaspberry-PiDeviceManufacturer/Type0102030405060Devicesseen(a) Weekday usage is diurnal.

(a) Upstream trafﬁc, and the measured upstream capacity.

(b) Usage on weekends is more constant.

Figure 13: Diurnal effect on wireless device usage. There is a clear week-
day diurnal effect on the number of devices online.

(b) Downstream trafﬁc, and the measured downstream capacity.

Figure 14: Diurnal pattern of link utilization for one home in our deploy-
ment. Capacity remains fairly constant, but utilization levels track daily
cycles.

mon.5 We recently started gathering Trafﬁc data in several devel-
oping countries, so we will soon be able to compare the distribution
of device manufacturers in developed and developing countries.

6. USAGE CHARACTERISTICS

In this section, we identify notable characteristics of home net-
work usage by analyzing data from the WiFi, Trafﬁc, and Capacity
data sets. Table 6 highlights our ﬁndings.
6.1 Which usage patterns are diurnal?

Figure 13 uses the WiFi data set to show the mean usage of wire-
less devices during each hour of the day, partitioned into weekday
5The Printer manufacturer was an Epson. Hardware includes
Giga-Byte and Microchip. VoIP is a UniData device.
Internet
TV includes Roku, TiVo, and ASRock home theatres. Wireless
Card includes AzureWave and GainSpan. Gaming includes Nin-
tendo and Mitsumi (which manufactures controllers for Playsta-
tions, Xbox, and Wii). Microsoft (possibly Xbox) is shown sepa-
rately. Gateway includes TP-Link, Realtek, Liteon, D-Link, Cisco-
Linksys, Belkin, and Askey. Smart Phones includes HTC, LG,
Motorola, Nokia, and a conﬁrmed Samsung Galaxy S II (Murata
Inc.). Other Samsung devices, including phones and tablets, are
shown separately. Original Device Manufacturers (ODMs) include
Compal, Hon Hai Precision, Quanta, Universal Global Systems,
Winstron Infocomm. Misc.
includes Polycom (a telecom prod-
uct manufacturer), Proliﬁx (which makes Internet-enabled ther-
mostats), and Pegatron (which manufactures a variety of products
including notebooks, laptops to gateways).

Weekday trafﬁc is much more diurnal than weekend trafﬁc.

§6.1, Fig. 13

Some home networks consistently oversaturate their up-
link;
they are likely able to do this because of the
“bufferbloat” phenomenon.

§6.2, Fig. 15

The single most usage-hungry device consumes about 65%
of the total home network trafﬁc, on average.

§6.3, Fig. 17

The most popular domain by volume in a home network is
responsible, on average, for about 38% of the total wide-
area trafﬁc from that home network, but only 19% of the
connections.

§6.4, Fig. 19

Table 6: Highlights of Section 6 results.

(Monday–Friday) and weekend. We observe a diurnal pattern in
the number of unique devices at various times of day on weekdays;
usage peaks during the evenings, and it is lowest during the after-
noons, when users are usually at work. We see that the number
of devices dips only slightly at night (compared to the dip during
the day), which may result from cellular devices that remain on
at night, as opposed to laptops that are more often switched off at
night when users are asleep. Diurnal patterns are less pronounced
on weekends.

385

0246810121416182022TimeofDay1.01.52.02.53.0Devices0246810121416182022TimeofDay1.01.52.02.53.0Devices4-024-044-064-084-104-124-14Date0102030405060MeasuredThroughput(Mbps)4-024-044-064-084-104-124-14Date020406080100MeasuredThroughput(Mbps)Figure 15: Link utilization as a function of the measured throughput.
Downlink saturation varies between 0 and 1. Uplink saturation is under
0.5 for most homes except for 3 cases. 2 homes over utilize their uplink

(a) In this home, utilization always exceeds the measured upstream
capacity. Upon further investigation, we discovered that this user
continually uploads scientiﬁc data from his home network.

Figure 14 shows an example of diurnal trafﬁc patterns for up-
stream and downstream trafﬁc from one home in the Trafﬁc data
set. Capacity measurements (shown as the dotted line at the top
of each plot) remains fairly constant, while utilization follows a
roughly diurnal trend. Many homes in Trafﬁc exhibit patterns sim-
ilar to those in Figure 14.
6.2 Do users saturate their access links?

Access link speeds continue to increase, but it is not known
whether users actually take advantage of this additional capacity.
We measure utilization by computing the maximum per-second
throughput every minute for users in the Trafﬁc data set. We then
compare the utilization with the access link throughput as estimated
by Capacity. We only consider instances when there is some device
exchanging trafﬁc with the Internet. Figure 15 plots 95th percentile
link saturation against capacity estimates for uplink and downlink
in bits per second on a log scale. In most cases there is plenty of
spare capacity. At the 95th percentile, only two homes saturate the
link and most homes use less than 50% of the available capacity.
Thus, even when the link is used, utilization does not come close to
capacity most of the time. If we include cases when the router is on
and connected to the Internet but has no trafﬁc then these numbers
drop even further.

The circles on the scatterplot show the equivalent case for up-
stream trafﬁc. We expect upstream usage to be less than down-
stream, because popular Internet services download more trafﬁc
than they upload; as expected, upstream utilization is less than
downstream. Figure 15 shows that uplink utilization exceeds ca-
pacity for certain homes. Figure 16 shows a timeseries of capacity
estimates and utilization for both of these homes. This user con-
sistently saturates the uplink; when combined with “bufferbloat”
problems problems endemic in home networking hardware, this be-
havior causes overestimation of the upstream throughput [19].
6.3 How much is each device used?

Figure 17 shows the fraction of trafﬁc that individual devices
contribute to overall home data consumption, ordered by the trafﬁc
consumption. Every household has at least three unique devices,
but one dominant device typically consumes the bulk of the trafﬁc
(60% on average; the next most dominant device consumes about
20% of the trafﬁc). Although we do not have ground truth about the
types of devices in each home, it is obvious that even if people have
multiple devices, they prefer to consume most data from a single

(b) Diurnal bursts in trafﬁc can sometimes result in utilization ex-
ceeding the network’s upstream capacity.

Figure 16: In some cases, uplink utilization exceeds estimate of capacity.
Buffering in customer premises equipment (“bufferbloat”) can result in sit-
uations where utilization exceeds the measured capacity. These two homes
likely experience signiﬁcant latency and performance problems due to con-
stant uplink saturation.

device. Differentiating devices types (e.g., laptops, tablets, phones,
media players, etc.) from network trafﬁc is ongoing research.
6.4 Which domains receive the most trafﬁc?
We now examine the popular domains that users in home net-
works visit and how those sets of popular domains vary across
different home networks. As described in Section 3, we measure
statistics for network trafﬁc to domains that match a whitelist of
domain names based on the 200 most popular domain names from
Alexa, plus any domains that users add to this list using a Web in-
terface built into our router ﬁrmware [8]. The router anonymizes
DNS lookups to all other domains.
Which domains are consistently popular? We ﬁrst explore the
domains that are the ﬁve and ten most popular domains in a sig-
niﬁcant number of home networks. Figure 18 shows this distribu-
tion; the dark bar indicates the number of times a particular do-
main appeared in the top ﬁve domains in a home network, and the
lighter bar shows the number of home networks for which a do-
main appeared in the top ten. The most consistently popular do-
mains on this list are as expected: Google, YouTube, Facebook,
Amazon, Apple, and Twitter. Unsurprisingly, the tail is also quite

386

10−1100101102103MeasuredThroughput(Mbps)0.00.51.01.52.02.5LinkUtilizationUplinkDownlink4-024-044-064-084-104-124-14Date0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0MeasuredThroughput(Mbps)4-024-044-064-084-104-124-14Date0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4MeasuredThroughput(Mbps)Figure 17: Breakdown of data usage by device. We see that even in homes
with multiple devices, there is usually a dominant device responsible for
most of the trafﬁc.

(a) iMac (Desktop).

(b) Roku box.

Figure 20: Trafﬁc distribution from an Apple iMac (desktop) and a Roku
streaming player. For the desktop, Dropbox creates signiﬁcant trafﬁc to
dropbox.com in the process of syncing large ﬁles. The Roku is used
almost exclusively for streaming, as evidenced by the large fraction of trafﬁc
to pandora.com, hulu.com, and netflix.com.

TCP connections is responsible for about 19% of all connections
on average; again, this distribution has a very long tail.

It is worth cautioning that our anonymization of some of the do-
mains in the Trafﬁc data set could bias some of these results. In
particular, if many homes in our data set for some reason sent a sig-
niﬁcant amount of trafﬁc to domains that were not in our whitelist
(e.g., domains for pornographic content, which we explicitly re-
moved from the whitelist), our results would not reﬂect this phe-
nomenon. Nevertheless, because trafﬁc to whitelisted domains rep-
resents about 65% of all trafﬁc volume to and from our home net-
works on average, we believe that we have captured a representa-
tive sample of usage. Additionally, the Trafﬁc data set currently
only represents homes in the United States; as we begin to collect
this data from home networks in other countries, we will be able
to compare differences in domain popularity from different home
networks.
Do different devices look up different sets of domains? We
also examined domain popularity for different devices in home
networks, to see whether the distribution of trafﬁc volumes to do-
mains differed by device. Our hypothesis was that certain devices
might look up considerably different sets of domains than others.
For example, an Apple device might exchange more trafﬁc with
apple.com, a streaming set top box might exchange more traf-
ﬁc with hulu.com, and so forth.
If true, such a ﬁnding could
prove extremely valuable for applications and utilities inside the
home that want to automatically “ﬁngerprint” devices—typically,
the manufacturer ID of a device’s MAC address may narrow down
the device to a manufacturer, but it is not ﬁne-grained enough to
distinguish, say, a laptop from a smart phone.

To explore this hypothesis, we surveyed users from six homes
in the Trafﬁc data set and asked them to manually identify the de-
vices corresponding to each of the MAC addresses in their home.
These labels provide ground truth identiﬁcation for these devices.
Here, we show an example of how different devices send different
distributions of trafﬁc volumes to various domains. Figures 20a
and 20b show the distributions for an Apple iMac Desktop and a
Roku Streaming Player, respectively. Whereas a device’s MAC ad-
dress only reveals the manufacturer, further examination of traf-
ﬁc behavior suggests that usage patterns may differ signiﬁcantly
enough across types of devices to serve as ﬁngerprints for device

Figure 18: The number of home networks in the Trafﬁc data set for which
a particular domain appeared in the top-ﬁve or top-ten domains, ranked by
total trafﬁc volume.

long, with many domains being popular for just one or two homes
(e.g., streaming sites, news sites). This distribution conﬁrms on
a smaller scale other reports concerning the rise of “super peers”
who are responsible for sending much of the content into access
networks [29].
How much trafﬁc are the most popular domains responsible
for? Figure 19 shows the distribution of domains visited in terms
of both total trafﬁc volume and the number of connections made to
the domain (which indicates the frequency of visits). Figure 19a
shows the average volume of trafﬁc from each home to the most
popular domains in the whitelist. (We use rank indexes for domains
rather than actual names, since the domain ranking is not exactly
the same across all homes.)

The results show that the most popular whitelisted domain by
volume on average accounts for about 38% of the total trafﬁc vol-
ume, even though these sites are responsible for less than 14% of
connections (Figure 19c); the next most popular domain accounts
for about 11% of all trafﬁc and only about 7% of all connections.
This disproportionality reﬂects the fact that these popular domains
are most likely serving streaming media content over long-running
TCP connections. Hence, it is fairly safe to assume that these top
two or three most popular domains by trafﬁc volume are likely to
represent streaming content, which would corroborate other reports
that more than 40% of trafﬁc into home networks is streaming video
trafﬁc. Figure 19b shows that the domain with the most number of

387

(a) Distribution of the most popular do-
mains by mean trafﬁc volume.

(b) Distribution of the most popular do-
mains by mean number of connections.

(c) Fraction of connections for the most
popular domains by volume.

Figure 19: Breakdown of data usage by domain. The most popular domain by volume consumes about 38% of total trafﬁc. “Total” refers to the portion of
trafﬁc to whitelisted domains (Alexa top 200, plus any domains that the user manually whitelists) and accounts for about 65% of the total trafﬁc on average.

identiﬁcation (either automatically, or with some help from the
user). Exploring how these trafﬁc patterns can assist with device
ﬁngerprinting is an area of future work.

7. DISCUSSION

This study offers a glimpse into the characteristics of a variety of
home networks; the ﬁndings in the paper suggest many avenues for
future work.
Combining network measurement with qualitative studies
about Internet use. Previous work in home networking has ex-
plored various characteristics of home networks via detailed user
studies and interviews [13, 14]. Our results can complement these
studies, which have been primarily qualitative to date. Future work
might entail doing a study that jointly performs user studies in
conjunction with network trafﬁc monitoring, to determine whether
users’ perceptions about their network use are consistent with the
reality (e.g., whether people spend more or less time online than
they claim).
Device ﬁngerprinting for security alerts. Various Internet ser-
vice providers offer services that alert users about possible infected
devices in the home network; unfortunately, because ISPs typically
cannot map offending trafﬁc to a particular MAC address, it is difﬁ-
cult for them to attribute trafﬁc to a particular device. Future work
could follow up on device ﬁngerprinting using trafﬁc patterns to
develop a system that provides more ﬁne-grained alerts to Internet
service providers about the suspicious activities of an individual
device within a home.
Expanding the study of usage to more countries. Our study of
home network usage focused on the United States alone. Future
work could expand this part of the study to determine how usage
patterns and other trafﬁc characteristics (e.g., device usage, popular
domains) differ by country.

8. CONCLUSION

Despite the proliferation of home networks, very little is known
about the properties of these networks, in terms of their availabil-
ity, infrastructure, or usage. Although continual, longitudinal mea-
surements of these networks can provide insight into how people
build, conﬁgure, and use these networks, there has been little at-
tempt to instrument these networks to gather such data. This pa-
per represents the ﬁrst attempt to instrument a signiﬁcant number
of home networks to learn about their properties. We presented

the ﬁrst large-scale, longitudinal measurement study of home net-
works, based on data from 126 homes and 19 countries. Our set of
passive and active measurements allows us to characterize proper-
ties of these networks such as network availability, infrastructure,
and usage. We have publicly released all data sets that do not in-
volve personally identifying information, and we plan to continue
expanding the deployment into a broader, more diverse set of envi-
ronments.

Our study yields many interesting ﬁndings with respect to the
availability, infrastructure, and usage of home networks that could
have broader implications for ISPs, users, and policymakers. With
respect to availability, we found that developing countries experi-
ence far more frequent connectivity interruptions, some of which
are due to poor connectivity, but others that are due to behavioral
patterns (e.g., turning the router on only during times when a user
wants to access the Internet). More insights into how behavioral
patterns differ across countries may help both ISPs and application
designers. We also found that the 2.4 GHz spectrum is signiﬁcantly
more crowded than the 5 GHz spectrum, both in terms of number
of devices and in terms of the number of visible access points; more
widespread statistics about the usage of wireless spectrum (as will
hopefully be possible as we continue to expand the BISmark de-
ployment) can ultimately help ISPs debug connectivity problems
in home networks and provide policymakers important data about
spectrum usage. Finally, we see that most of the trafﬁc from homes
is destined for only a few domains, and that, on average, most of the
trafﬁc originates from just a small handful of devices. These usage
statistics may ultimately help ISPs with provisioning and peering
decisions, and they also offer a rare picture into how people use
and interact with their home networks. Although this study has of-
fered a ﬁrst glimpse into many aspects home networks around the
world, we expect that more lessons will come with more experience
and a broader deployment.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by NSF award CNS-1059350 and
a Google Focused Research Award. We thank the hundreds of BIS-
mark users, without whom this research would not have been pos-
sible. We also thank our shepherd, Yashar Ganjali, and the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable feedback.

REFERENCES
[1] Internet world stats.

http://www.internetworldstats.com/.

388

[18] M. Dischinger, A. Haeberlen, K. P. Gummadi, and S. Saroiu.
Characterizing residential broadband networks. In Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference, San Diego, CA, USA,
Oct. 2007.

[19] J. Gettys. Bufferbloat. http://www.bufferbloat.net/.
[20] R. Grinter, W. Edwards, M. Chetty, E. Poole, J. Sung, J. Yang,

A. Crabtree, P. Tolmie, T. Rodden, C. Greenhalgh, et al. The ins and
outs of home networking: The case for useful and usable domestic
networking. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI), 16(2):1–28, 2009.

[21] R. Grinter, W. Edwards, M. Newman, and N. Ducheneaut. The work

to make a home network work. In ECSCW 2005, pages 469–488.
Springer, 2005.

[22] International Monetary Fund. World economic outlook database.

http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/
01/weodata/index.aspx, Apr. 2013.

[23] W. Keith Edwards, R. Mahajan, and D. Wetherall. Advancing the

state of home networking. Communications of the ACM, 54(6), 2011.
[24] H. Kim, S. Sundaresan, M. Chetty, N. Feamster, and W. K. Edwards.
Communicating with caps: Managing usage caps in home networks.
In ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, volume 41,
pages 470–471. ACM, 2011.

[25] C. Kreibich, N. Weaver, B. Nechaev, and V. Paxson. Netalyzr:
Illuminating the edge network. In Proc. Internet Measurement
Conference, Melbourne, Australia, Nov. 2010.

[26] Netalyzr. http://netalyzr.icsi.berkeley.edu/.
[27] E. S. Poole, M. Chetty, R. E. Grinter, and W. K. Edwards. More than

meets the eye: transforming the user experience of home network
management. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on
Designing interactive systems, pages 455–464. ACM, 2008.

[28] M. A. Sánchez, J. S. Otto, Z. S. Bischof, and F. E. Bustamante.
Trying broadband characterization at home. In Passive & Active
Measurement (PAM), Hong Kong, Mar. 2013.

[29] Sandvine. Global Internet Phenomena Report. http://www.

sandvine.com/news/global_broadband_trends.asp,
2012.

[30] Shaperprobe. http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~partha/

diffprobe/shaperprobe.html.

[31] T. N. Smyth, S. Kumar, I. Medhi, and K. Toyama. Where there’s a

will there’s a way: mobile media sharing in urban india. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 753–762, New York, NY, USA,
2010. ACM.

[32] S. Sundaresan, W. de Donato, N. Feamster, R. Teixeira, S. Crawford,

and A. Pescapè. Broadband internet performance: A view from the
gateway. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Aug.
2011.

[33] S. P. Wyche, T. N. Smyth, M. Chetty, P. M. Aoki, and R. E. Grinter.

Deliberate interactions: characterizing technology use in nairobi,
kenya. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 2593–2602, New York, NY,
USA, 2010. ACM.

[2] Netgear WNDR3800. http://www.netgear.com/home/
products/wirelessrouters/high-performance/
wndr3800.aspx.

[3] OpenWRT. http://www.openwrt.org.
[4] Reports from Federal Communications Commission.

http://www.fcc.gov/reports. FCC.

[5] SamKnows & Ofcom Working together for better broadband. http:

//www.samknows.com/broadband/signup/ofcom.

[6] Sign up with us today to accurately measure your broadband

performance. https://www.samknows.eu/.

[7] The World in 2011: ICT Facts and Figures.

http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/
material/ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf. International
Telecommunication Union.
[8] Top Sites in United States.

http://www.alexa.com/topsites/countries/US.
Alexa.

[9] The World Bank GDP per capita. http:

//data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD,
2011. The World Bank.

[10] Y. Benkler. Next generation connectivity: A review of broadband

internet transitions and policy from around the world. Working
paper 8, Regulation2point0, Oct. 2009.

[11] K. L. Calvert, W. K. Edwards, and R. E. Grinter. Moving toward the

middle: The case against the end-to-end argument in home
networking. In Proc. 6th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks
(Hotnets-VI), Atlanta, GA, 2007.

[12] J. Chen, S. Amershi, A. Dhananjay, and L. Subramanian. Comparing
web interaction models in developing regions. In Proceedings of the
First ACM Symposium on Computing for Development, ACM DEV
’10, pages 6:1–6:9, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

[13] M. Chetty, R. Banks, R. Harper, T. Regan, A. Sellen, C. Gkantsidis,

T. Karagiannis, and P. Key. Who’s hogging the bandwidth: the
consequences of revealing the invisible in the home. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’10, pages 659–668, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[14] M. Chetty, D. Haslem, A. Baird, U. Ofoha, B. Sumner, and

R. Grinter. Why is my internet slow?: making network speeds
visible. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, pages 1889–1898, New York, NY,
USA, 2011. ACM.

[15] M. Chetty, J.-Y. Sung, and R. E. Grinter. How smart homes learn: the

evolution of the networked home and household. In Proceedings of
the 9th international conference on Ubiquitous computing, UbiComp
’07, pages 127–144, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer-Verlag.

[16] L. DiCioccio, R. Teixeira, M. May, and C. Kreibich. Probe and pray:

using upnp for home network measurements. In Proceedings of the
13th international conference on Passive and Active Measurement,
PAM’12, pages 96–105, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag.

[17] L. DiCioccio, R. Teixeira, and C. Rosenberg. Measuring home

networks with HomeNet Proﬁler. In Passive & Active Measurement
(PAM), Hong Kong, Mar. 2013.

389

