Proﬁling High-School Students with Facebook: How

Online Privacy Laws Can Actually Increase Minors’ Risk

Ratan Dey

Polytechnic Institute of

New York University
Brooklyn, New York

Yuan Ding

Polytechnic Institute of

New York University
Brooklyn, New York

ratan@cis.poly.edu

dingyuan1987@gmail.com

Keith W. Ross

Polytechnic Institute of

New York University
Brooklyn, New York
ross@poly.edu

ABSTRACT

1.

INTRODUCTION

Lawmakers, children’s advocacy groups and modern society at large
recognize the importance of protecting the Internet privacy of mi-
nors (under 18 years of age). Online Social Networks, in particular,
take precautions to prevent third parties from using their services to
discover and proﬁle minors. These precautions include displaying
only minimal information in registered minors’ public proﬁles, not
listing minors when searching for users by high school or city, and
banning young children from joining altogether.

In this paper we show how an attacker can circumvent these pre-
cautions. We develop efﬁcient crawling and data mining method-
ologies to discover and proﬁle most of the high school students in a
targeted high school. In particular, using Facebook and for a given
target high school, the methodology ﬁnds most of the students in
the school, and for each discovered student infers a proﬁle that in-
cludes signiﬁcantly more information than is available in a regis-
tered minor’s public proﬁle. Such proﬁles can be used for many
nefarious purposes, including selling the proﬁles to data brokers,
large-scale automated spear-phishing attacks on minors, as well as
physical safety attacks such as stalking, kidnapping and arranging
meetings for sexual abuse.

Ironically, the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA),
a law designed to protect the privacy of children, indirectly facili-
tates the approach. In order to bypass restrictions put in place due
to the COPPA law, some children lie about their ages when regis-
tering, which not only increases the exposure for themselves but
also for their non-lying friends. Our analysis strongly suggests
there would be signiﬁcantly less privacy leakage if Facebook did
not have age restrictions.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

E.m [Data]: Miscellaneous

Keywords

Facebook; COPPA; Privacy; Minor; Policy; High School

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC’13, October 23–25, 2013, Barcelona, Spain.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-1953-9/13/10 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2504730.2504733.

It is generally recognized that protecting the Internet privacy
of minors (under 18 years of age in the US) is important, with
modern society manifesting this concern in many ways. The US
government, through the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA) [6] is designed to protect the privacy of children under
13 years of age. It details what a website operator must include in
a privacy policy, how to seek veriﬁable consent from a parent, and
what responsibilities an online service provider has to protect chil-
dren’s privacy and safety, including restrictions on the marketing
to children under 13. Many consumer, privacy and child advocacy
groups continue to actively lobby governments to provide better
privacy protection for minors [7]. The US Congress is currently
considering new bills to strengthen online safeguards for children
and teens [10, 12].

Online Social Networks (OSNs) additionally take measures to
protect the privacy of minors. Facebook, for example, treats minors
and adults with distinctly different policies [5]. Facebook currently
bans young children (under 13) from joining, does not list minors
when searching for users by high school or city, and displays only
minimal information in registered minors’ public proﬁles, no mat-
ter how they conﬁgure their privacy settings.

In this paper we show how an attacker (third party) can circum-
vent these precautions to discover and proﬁle most of the high-
school students in a targeted geographical area. In particular, using
Facebook and for a given target high school, we construct an efﬁ-
cient methodology which ﬁnds most of the students in the school,
and for each discovered student infers a proﬁle which includes sig-
niﬁcantly more information than is available in a registered mi-
nor’s public proﬁle. For each discovered student, the additional
information minimally includes the student’s current city, current
high-school, graduation year, inferred birth year, and list of school
friends. The generated proﬁles of about half of the identiﬁed mi-
nors further include varying amounts of additional information, in-
cluding shared photos and wall postings. The information is col-
lected passively, that is, without attempting to establish friend links
with any of the students. By proﬁling all the high schools in a
city, a third-party can discover and develop proﬁles for most of the
minors, ages 14-17, in that city. As discussed in Section 2, the
third-party could use such proﬁles for many nefarious purposes, in-
cluding selling the proﬁles to data brokers, large-scale automated
spear-phishing attacks on minors, as well as physical safety attacks
such as prospecting candidate children for stalking, kidnapping and
arranging meetings for sexual abuse.

Using off-line channels, it is difﬁcult to obtain complete lists
of students attending a given target school. For example, in the
course of the research for this paper, while seeking ground-truth
data, we contacted administrators of four high schools and asked

405them to provide us with a list of names of all students currently
attending their schools, with assurances of keeping the lists entirely
conﬁdential as well as not mentioning the names of the schools in
this study. But the administrations of these high schools would
not provide the lists, even with such assurances, fearing potential
lawsuits from parents or other legal actions. High-school websites
today also do not publicly provide lists of current students.

It is also difﬁcult to obtain complete lists of students attending
a given target school directly from OSNs. As of April 2013, and
documented in this paper, Facebook takes explicit actions to pre-
vent people from obtaining school lists directly from its site. Al-
though Facebook allows its members to search for other members
who are associated with any given high school or city, the search
results returned by the service do not include registered minors; for
a high school search, they only include members who are registered
as currently being 18 years or older, with the vast majority of the
results being alumni of the high school. Because of this measure,
it is not possible for a third party to directly use Facebook’s search
services (including Facebook’s Graph Search) to collect the names
of the students at any target high school and attempt to proﬁle them.
Google+ also takes similar measures to protect the privacy of mi-
nors, as described in the Appendix A of this paper.

Ironically, the third-part privacy leakages described in this paper
are indirectly exacerbated by part of the COPPA law, which was de-
signed to protect minors’ privacy. As part of the COPPA law, chil-
dren under thirteen are required to obtain veriﬁable parental con-
sent before joining an online service. Given economic costs, social
concerns, and technical issues, most online services — including
Facebook and Google+ — choose to avoid this COPPA require-
ment by banning users younger than 13. Upon creating an account,
these sites ask users for their birth date to determine if they are 13
or older. If the user indicates being under 13 years of age, the site
prevents the user from creating an account. The key observations
and ingredients behind our methodology are the following:

1. In order to circumvent the age restriction (due to COP-
PA), many under-13 users lie about their age to gain access
to online social networks when creating their accounts [19].
For example, in order to gain access to Facebook, an 11-year-
old boy may say he is 13 years old or may even say he is over
18 when registering.

2. Several years later, when the lying minor enters high school,
his registered age very possibly will be 18 or older. The OSN
will therefore consider him an adult although he is actually a
minor.

3. When searching for users by high school, Facebook (and
Google+) only returns members who are registered adults.
But a small fraction of these registered adults will in truth
be minors. A smaller fraction of these “lying” minors will
indicate in their public proﬁles that they currently attend the
target high school.

4. By identifying the minors returned by the search results, crawl-

ing their friend lists and performing statistical processing on
their friend lists, we show it is possible to discover most of
the students in the target high school and, for each discov-
ered student, create a proﬁle that contains signiﬁcantly more
information than should be available in a minor’s public pro-
ﬁle.

stage for widespread discovery and inference of minors’ private
information.

To demonstrate the feasibility of high-school proﬁling, we ap-
plied the methodology to one small private high school and two
relatively large public high schools, located in different geograph-
ical regions in the USA. Our institution provided us with an IRB
to perform the research under the condition that we keep private all
collected and inferred information about individuals and only re-
lease aggregated results. For the smaller high school, we were able
to obtain, through a conﬁdential off-line channel, ground-truth in-
formation including the names of all the students in the high school
and their graduating classes. For the larger high schools, we do not
have complete ground-truth information to evaluate the approach.
Instead, we obtain limited ground-truth information for a small
set of students by scraping Facebook, and develop an evaluation
methodology based on the limited ground-truth information.

We also develop a methodology to estimate how much privacy
leakage would occur in a world where the OSN lets all users join,
independent of age, and compare the estimate to the extent of leak-
age in our current world with bans on children under 13. Our results
suggest that a third-party not only can discover more minors, but
can also build more extensive proﬁles than what would be the case
in a world without age restrictions. Thus, in terms of third-party
privacy intrusion, this component of COPPA actually puts minors
at greater risk than they would be if the law had never been enacted.
We emphasize, however, that COPPA has many components, and
does help to protect the privacy intrusion from ﬁrst party services
(such as OSNs). Although the COPPA law indirectly exacerbates
the third party privacy problem for minors, we are certainly not ar-
guing that governments should abandon enacting laws to protect
the online privacy of children. We believe, however, that the laws
must be carefully designed and consider leakages to third-parties
as well as to ﬁrst-parties.

To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper that (i) identiﬁes the
third-party privacy leakage problem in OSNs for minors, (ii) quan-
tiﬁes the extent of the privacy leakage, and (iii) using measurement
and analysis, investigates and quantiﬁes the impact of a privacy law
on privacy leakage. As part of responsible disclosure, we informed
both Facebook and Google about the methodology described here.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we brieﬂy out-
line the consequential threats resulting from the high-school proﬁl-
ing. In Section 3 we provide deﬁnitions of terms used throughout
the paper, discuss Facebook’s policy for minors, and discuss eth-
ical issues associated with the collection and analysis of our data.
We present the details of the high-school proﬁling in Section 4. We
evaluate the success of the attack for three high schools in Section
5. In Section 6 we investigate to what degree minors can be proﬁled
using the attack. In Section 7 we estimate the extent of leakage that
would occur in a world without COPPA. In Section 8 we consider
one promising countermeasure, namely, disabling reverse lookup.
In Section 9 we discuss relevant prior work, and in Section 10 we
summarize our conclusions.

2. CONSEQUENTIAL THREATS

Suppose a third party, with modest crawling and computational
resources, for a given target high school, is able to determine all
the students in the school and proﬁle them, with the proﬁles con-
taining a varying amount of information, but minimally including
full name, proﬁle picture, gender, current city, high school name,
graduation year (i.e., grade), high-school friends and inferred birth
year1. For a given high-school, we call the collection of these pro-

Thus, a component of the COPPA law and the fact that OSNs do
not verify the age of its users have together inadvertently set the

1A public Facebook proﬁle for a minor at most contains name,
proﬁle picture and gender. Thus the constructed proﬁles addition-

406ﬁles the high-school proﬁles. Moreover, suppose the third party has
a means to send messages directly to many of the students, and can
send friend requests to all of the students. We now describe some
of the consequential threats.

The ﬁrst major threat is that of data brokers collecting high-
school proﬁles and selling them to others, such as advertisers, col-
lege recruiters, and employment agencies. Because the teen market
surpasses US$200 billion in the US alone, it is not surprising that
data brokers are already seeking to compile dossiers on children
[13, 11]. By leveraging the information in the high-school proﬁles,
data brokers can also enhance the proﬁles by linking them with
other personal data available online and from public records. For
example, by obtaining voter registration records (which most states
make available for a small fee), the data broker can use the last
name and city in the high-school proﬁles to link the students to par-
ents in the voter registration records, thereby determining the street
address of many of the students. For those students with friend lists
in the high-school proﬁle, if a parent appears in the friend list, then
the street-address association can be done with greater certainty.

The second major threat is that of a pedophile, who seeks to use
the Internet to arrange sexual encounters with children. For exam-
ple, recently a man allegedly used Facebook to arrange meetings
and have indecent contact with seven different girls, ranging in age
from 13 to 15. The district attorney for the case stressed the impor-
tance of minors “not sharing personal information online, like full
names, ages, addresses, phone numbers and school information”
[9]). A pedophile use the approach himself, using the acquired
proﬁles to prospect for victims.

Finally, the proﬁles could also be used to fuel a large-scale and
highly personalized spear-phishing attacks against minors. Mes-
sages could automatically be generated which mention the target
students’ high schools, graduation years, and friends, tricking the
targets into installing malware on the family computer, for exam-
ple.

3. PRELIMINARIES

Throughout this paper we deﬁne a minor to be any person who is
currently under 18 years old. Anyone 18 years or older is said to be
an adult. Note that most students currently attending a high school
are minors. (A fraction of the ﬁnal-year students may be adults,
with the fraction increasing each month in the school year.) OSNs
typically require users to specify their birth date (day, month, and
year) when they register. As discussed in the Introduction, some
users may lie about their birth dates when creating accounts in order
to circumvent the minimum age requirement. A user is said to be a
registered minor if the OSN believes the user is currently a minor
based on the registered birth date. We deﬁne a registered adult in
a similar manner. In the context of Facebook, we say a user (say,
Alice) is a stranger to another user (say, Bob) if all the following
conditions are satisﬁed: (i) Alice is not a friend of Bob; (ii) Alice is
not a friend of friend of Bob (that is, Alice and Bob have no mutual
friends); and (iii) Alice does not belong to any of Bob’s school or
work networks.

3.1 Facebook and Registered Minors

In Facebook, registered minors have a different experience with
privacy than do registered adults. We now highlight the differences
that are relevant to the current study. Table 1 shows the information
about a user available to a stranger for when the user keeps the de-

ally contain current city, high school name, graduation year, high-
school friends, inferred birth year, and for many students much
more information.

fault settings and for when the user conﬁgures the setting for max-
imum sharing (worst case). A check in the box means the informa-
tion is available to the stranger for the speciﬁc scenario. As shown
in Table 1, when a stranger visits a registered minor’s proﬁle page,
only a limited amount of information is available to the stranger: at
most the user’s name, proﬁle photo, networks joined, and gender
are available. (Typically less, depending on how the user conﬁg-
ured her privacy settings. For example, typically less than 10% of
registered minors specify network.) Further, the “Message” button
will never be visible to a stranger. We say that only minimal in-
formation is available about a user (registered minor or adult) if a
stranger, when visiting the user’s public proﬁle, sees at most name,
proﬁle photo, networks joined, and gender, and the “Message” but-
ton is not available. It follows that if a stranger visits a user’s public
proﬁle and more than the minimal information is available, then the
user must be a registered adult.

OSNs typically provide a friend-search feature, allowing its users
to ﬁnd new friends from different parts of their past and current
lives, including friends from previous high schools. Facebook pro-
vides this feature in its “Find Friends Portal” [2], where a user can
search for potential friends by inputting either hometown, current
city, high school, mutual friend, college or university, employer,
or graduate school. When a stranger does a high school search by
the high school name, Facebook returns a few hundred users who
are associated with the target high school. The stranger can also
attempt to obtain additional users by creating additional fake ac-
counts. We wrote a script that collects users in this manner. The
script takes as input the target high school’s Facebook ID, a user-
name and password for a fake account, and outputs several hundred
unique Facebook user IDs. We observed in the course of experi-
ments that Facebook does not return any registered minors when
a stranger searches with the Find Friends Portal. We veriﬁed this
claim by carrying out an experiment with a high school for which
we have the complete list of current students at the high school, as
well as the complete list of recent alumni. Facebook recently in-
troduced “Graph Search” which provides a natural way to search
for content, people, pages, and so on. In particular, for a given tar-
get high school HS1, a third party can now search for users who
“study at HS1 in/after/before 2013” or for “current students at HS1
who live in city1” and many other combinations. As with the Find
Friends Portal, using the ground-truth data, our experiments found
that Facebook does not return registered minors when a stranger
searches with Graph Search.

In summary, in an attempt to act responsibly towards minors,
Facebook takes some precautions to protect minors’ privacy. We
observed and veriﬁed that Facebook does not return registered mi-
nors when a stranger searches by high school. Also, when a stranger
visits a registered minor’s public proﬁle page, only limited informa-
tion is made available, no matter how the minor conﬁgures the pri-
vacy settings. In particular, a minor’s high school, graduation year,
and friend list are never directly available to a stranger. Google+
takes similar measures, as described in the Appendix A.

3.2 Legal and Ethical Considerations

To perform the research described in this paper, we implemented
customized crawlers that visit public Web pages in Facebook and
download the HTML source code of each Web page. Our parser
then extracted relevant data from the HTML source code and stored
the data in an SQL database.

Crawling data in OSNs is an ethically sensitive issue. One ques-
tion that arises is if it is ethically acceptable and justiﬁable to con-
duct crawling experiments in social networks? We believe that the
only way to reliably estimate success rates of the methodology in

407Table 1: Facebook: Default and worst-case information available to strangers

Default for
Reg. minors Reg. Adults

Default for Worst-case for Worst-case for

X

Name, Gender, Networks,
Proﬁle Photo
HS, Relationship,
Interested In
Birthday
Hometown, Current City,
Friendlist
Photos
Contact Information
Public Search

X

X

X
X

X

Reg. Minors

Reg. Adults

X

X

X
X

X
X
X
X

the real-world is to use realistic experiments. We nevertheless took
several precautions while crawling. First, we only accessed user
information that was publicly available. Second, by implementing
sleeping functions and limiting our study to three high schools, the
crawling was not particularly aggressive and did not perturb the
performance of Facebook.

We also obtained IRB approval for this work from our university.
As part of responsible disclosure, we informed both Facebook and
Google about the methodology in October 2012. Because of the
sensitive nature of the information we gathered and inferred, we
will not be making our data sets public and we will not explicitly
identify the high schools involved. The data is encrypted, pass-
word protected and lies behind a ﬁrewall. In the future, we will be
destroying and whitewashing all the collected data.

4. HIGH SCHOOL PROFILING

We now describe our basic version of the high-school proﬁling
methodology. The third party begins by selecting a target high
school. Let M be the set of all the students currently attending
the target high school with active accounts in the OSN. The goal is
to ﬁnd most of the students in M and obtain (or infer) as much pro-
ﬁle information as possible about each of those students. We do not
require the third party to be an OSN friend, or a friend-of-a-friend,
of any of the students in M , that is, the third party may be a stranger
to all the students in the high school. With sufﬁcient computational
resources, the methodology could be applied to hundreds or even
thousands of high schools.

4.1 The Basic Methodology: Exploiting Lying

Minors

For any user u in the OSN, let F (u) be the user’s current set of
friends. For some users, F (u) will be visible on the user’s public
proﬁle; for other users F (u) will not be publicly available. The
methodology in its most basic form is as follows.

1. The third party inputs the name of the target high school into
the OSN’s high-school search function. The search function
returns a list of members who are associated with the target
high school. The third party may use a script to automatically
scroll down the page (thereby sending additional HTTP re-
quests with AJAX) in order to get a longer list of members.
The third party may also use multiple accounts when search-
ing. We refer to the set of all the members found in this
manner as the seeds and denote the set by S.

2. The third party uses a crawler to download the public proﬁle
pages for each of the seeds, parses the pages, and determines

the users who indicate they currently attend the target high
school (by listing their high school as the target high school
and providing a graduation year that is the current year or
a future year). Let C 0 be the subset of seeds who explic-
itly indicate (in their public proﬁles) that they are currently
students in the target high school. (Most of the users in C 0
will be minors who, several years earlier when under 13, lied
about their age during registration.) Let C be the subset of
users in C 0 who make their friend lists public. We refer to
C as the core set. As we will see, the number of core users
is typically fairly small, on the order of 5% of the number
of students in the high school. For each user in set C, we
know the user’s graduation class year. Assuming that the
high school is a four-year school, denote C1, C2, C3, and
C4, for students in the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth school
years in the core set C.

3. For each student u ∈ C, the third party downloads the friend
list, F (u), from the OSN. Let K be the set of all friends
obtained from the core users, that is,

K = ∪u∈CF (u).

We refer to K as the candidate set. Our experiments show
that the number of candidates will approximately be one or-
der of magnitude greater than the target high school size.

4. We expect some of the users in K to be current students in the
target high school. We now try to determine which ones. For
each candidate u ∈ K, we use reverse lookup to determine
its friends in the core. Speciﬁcally, for each u ∈ K, we
determine the set of friends in the core set for each of the
four graduation years:

Gi(u) = {v ∈ Ci

: u ∈ F (v)},

i = 1, 2, 3, 4.

(1)

Clearly each Gi(u) ⊆ F (u). Note that to obtain the Gi(u)’s,
the third party does not have to obtain the proﬁle pages or
friend lists of any of the users in the large candidate set K.
In fact, user u’s friend list may not even be directly available
to strangers.

5. For each candidate u ∈ K, the third party calculates the
fraction of users in each of the core class sets with whom
the candidate is friends, and then calculates the maximum of
these four fractions. Speciﬁcally, the third party calculates

x(u) = max
1≤i≤4

|Gi(u)|

|Ci|

(2)

4086. The third party rank orders the users in K according to their
x(u) values, from highest to lowest. The third party chooses
a threshold t in the vicinity of the total number of students
attending the high school (which can typically be found from
Wikipedia or some other source). The third party then con-
siders the ﬁrst t students as current students in the target high
school (as well as the students in the set C 0). Let T denote
the set of t students and H = T ∪ C 0. The third party also
classiﬁes each such student u ∈ T into a graduating year
according to the highest |Gi(u)|/|Ci| value, i = 1, 2, 3, 4.

At the end of these steps, the third party has a set of OSN users H
believed to be students at the target high school. The third party has
also classiﬁed all the students in H by graduation class year. For
each student, by knowing the high school, the third party knows
the current city; by knowing both the student’s last name and cur-
rent city, the third party can often determine the student’s home
address from voter registration records. The third party can also
estimate birth year from the graduation year. As described in the
Section 6, the third party can further determine each student’s high-
school Facebook friends (even though this is also not available in
the public proﬁles), and can obtain signiﬁcantly more information
for about half of the high-school students.

Note that the methodology relies on the ability to obtain a small
set of core users, that is, ﬁnding a set of users for whom the third
party knows with certainty that the users are in the high school and
knows their graduation year. Because the search function only re-
turns registered adults who make their high school public, a priori
the core set will have no students in the ﬁrst three years of high
school and few in the last year. However, because a signiﬁcant
high-school students lied about their birth dates when creating ac-
counts when they were under 13 (in order to circumvent the age
restriction due to the COPPA law), it is indeed possible to obtain
a core set from the search function including students distributed
across the four years. Also note that the methodology is passive,
that is, without attempting to establish friend links with any of the
students.

4.2 Performance of Methodology

The set H, and the classiﬁcation of its members by graduation
year, is obtained by statistical inference and therefore may contain
errors. For example, some of the users in H may be false posi-
tives, that is, they are not current students at the target high school.
Furthermore, H may not contain all of the students in M . Two im-
portant measures for the performance are the fraction of students
from M found, given by |H ∩ M |/|M |, and the number of false
positives, given by |H − M |. Note that by varying the value of the
threshold t we can trade off these two performance measures: in-
creasing t should increase the fraction of students found but should
also increase the number of false positives. In this paper we esti-
mate these measures for each of the three test high schools.

4.3 Enhanced methodology

We now describe an important enhancement, which requires a
relatively small amount of additional crawling.
In the enhanced
methodology, after rank ordering the x(u)’s and selecting a thresh-
old t, we download the public proﬁle pages of the ﬁrst t(1 + )
users. (In this paper, we use  = 1 throughout.) Denote this set of
users by T +. For each user u in T +, we then check the user’s pro-
ﬁle to see if he indicates he is currently a student in the target high
school. If so, we move u from T + to C, thereby increasing the
size of the core set. After doing this for all u ∈ T +, we recalculate
Gi(u) for each u ∈ T + and i = 1, 2, 3, 4, and proceed from Step
5 in the Basic Approach.

In addition to these approaches, there are many possible heuris-
tics one may construe based on the Gi(u) data. It is also possible
to explore traditional machine learning approaches, use interaction
graphs [26], or consider the evolution of the activity between users
[25] to optimize the results. As the purpose of our research is to
demonstrate the feasibility of the methodology rather than fully op-
timize it, we do not pursue these optimizations here.

4.4 Filtering

In order to possibly improve the performance of the basic and
enhanced methodologies, we also examine ﬁltering out some of
the candidate users. This ﬁltering variation, as with the enhanced
methodology, requires the third party to download the public pro-
ﬁles of the ﬁrst (1 + )t users in the candidate set. After download-
ing these proﬁles, the third party applies ﬁltering rules to eliminate
candidates who are likely former students at the target high school
(and have transferred out or have already graduated). We used the
following ﬁlter rules:

• Graduate School: The candidate speciﬁes a graduate school

in the public proﬁle page.

• Different High School: The candidate provides one high school

and that high school is different from the target high school.

• High school graduation year: The candidate provides a high-
school graduation year that is not in the current year or in the
subsequent three years.

• Current city: The candidate provides a current city other than

the city in which the high school resides.

4.5 Estimating the Measurement Effort

Most OSNs employ anti-crawling techniques to protect the data
of their members and maintain the performance of their sites. Typ-
ically, if a member behaves suspiciously (for example, if the mem-
ber tries to access many user proﬁles in a short time), the member’s
account will be temporarily, or permanently, disabled. Therefore
the measurement effort is an important consideration.

For the Basic Methodology, the measurement effort has three
components: (i) the number of HTTP GETs sent to obtain the IDs
of the seed users S (Note that with AJAX, multiple HTTP GETs
may need to be sent to get the entire page.); (ii) the number of
HTTP GETs sent to obtain the public proﬁle pages of the seed users
in S; (iii) the number of HTTP GETs sent to obtain the friend lists
of each of the core users (again sending multiple GETs via AJAX).
The approximate number of HTTP GETs sent is therefore given by
A · R + |S| + |C| · f /p, where A is the number of accounts used,
R is the number of HTTP GETs sent per account when gathering
the seed list, f is the average number of friends a student has, and
p is the number of friends gathered with a single HTTP request.
(Currently, Facebook uses p = 20).

For the Enhanced Methodology, we additionally (i) download
the proﬁle pages of an additional (1 + )t users, where t is roughly
the number of students in the target school, and (ii) download the
friend lists for the augmented core set. In Section 5 we will show
that the total number of requests for a typical school is small for
both the basic and enhanced methodologies.

5. RESULTS FOR THREE HIGH SCHOOLS

5.1 Data Sets

In order to estimate the success of the methodologies, we applied
them to three US high schools, which we refer to as HS1, HS2, and

409HS3. We collected the data for HS1, HS2, and HS3 in March 2012,
June 2012, and June 2012, respectively. HS1 is a small private ur-
ban high school with about 360 students. For this high school, we
were able to obtain, through a conﬁdential channel outside of Face-
book, the complete student lists (segmented by graduation year)
for the high school, and also complete alumni lists for recent grad-
uation years. These lists enable us to evaluate the success of the
methodologies. HS1 has a relatively high churn rate, with 10-20%
of the students transferring in and out of the high school every year.
Because of the high churn rate, it is a challenging problem to de-
termine an accurate estimate of the current snapshot of the student
body. However, we will see that even with this high churn rate, the
basic methodology provides good results.

For the HS1 students in the 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015 grad-
uating classes, we were able to ﬁnd the Facebook IDs and public
proﬁle pages for |M | = 325 students. We did this essentially by
running the basic methodology on HS1, ﬁnding the users who were
ranked the highest, and checking for their names in the ground truth
list. We were not able to ﬁnd the Facebook IDs for about 10% of
the student body at HS1. Most of these remaining students most
likely do not have Facebook accounts. A small number of them
may have accounts with alias names that we could not match to the
ground-truth list. The 325 students are roughly evenly distributed
over the four years; for 112 students (34%) their friend lists are
publicly available.

HS2 is a public suburban high school on the East Coast with a
much larger student body of approximately 1,500 students. The
school has diverse economic and racial demographics, with about
15% of the students being African-American, 10% Asian, and 10%
Hispanic. HS3 is a public high school in a small city in the Mid-
west, also with approximately 1,500 students. Although neither for
HS2 nor HS3 were we able to obtain complete ground-truth infor-
mation, we develop a methodology to evaluate the approach based
on partial ground-truth information mined from Facebook.

5.2 Initial Seed Set

We obtained initial seed sets from Facebook’s Find Friend por-
tal, using two accounts for the smaller HS1 and four accounts for
each of the larger high schools HS2 and HS3. Table 2 provides a
summary of the data collected for the three schools. As shown in
Table 2, for HS1, HS2, and HS3, we found 18, 70, and 46 core
users (with friend lists) and 6,282, 14,317, and 11,736 candidates,
respectively. For the enhanced methodology, we obtained 22, 152,
and 178 (extended) core users for each of three high schools. For
each high school, the number of core users is roughly 5% of the
number of students in the school.

5.3 Measurement Effort

Table 3 summarizes the approximate measurement effort required
to collect the data sets for the three high schools in Table 3. Note
that the effort is quite small, with the number of HTTP requests
sent being about twice the number of students in the target high
school for the basic methodology, and about ﬁve times the number
of students in the target high school for the enhanced methodology.

5.4 Results for HS1

Recall that for HS1 there are 325 students having Facebook ac-
counts. Also recall that we have the complete ground-truth infor-
mation for HS1 (i.e., the Facebook IDs and graduation years for all
of the 325 students). The results for both the basic and enhanced
methodologies, with and without ﬁltering, are shown in Table 4
for thresholds t ranging from 200 to 500. The set of users in each
column includes the core users (or extended core users for the en-

% of students found for HS1
% of false positives for HS1

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

d
n
u
o

f
 
s
t

n
e
d
u

t
s
 
f

o

 

e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

10

200

250

300

350

400

450

500

Top t value

Figure 1: Overall performance of enhanced methodology for
HS1

hanced methodology). In the notation x/y, x is the number of users
from the set of 325 students that are found; and y is the number of
users, from the set of x users, that are classiﬁed in the correct clas-
siﬁcation year. We see for the top 200, 300, and 400 cases, the en-
hanced methodology with ﬁltering gives the best results; for the top
500 case, the enhanced methodology without ﬁltering gives some-
what better results than the enhanced methodology with ﬁltering.

We see that the ﬁltering indeed reduced the number of false pos-
itives for the threshold of top 200, top 300, and top 400 users. But
for the larger threshold, the ﬁltering actually increased the number
of false positives. This can be explained as follows. On one hand,
when we increase the threshold beyond 400, we add mostly false
positives, since there are not many true positives remaining. On the
other hand, the ﬁltering also accidentally ﬁlters out some of the true
positives, giving an overall decrease in performance.

As an example, let us suppose that the third party decides to use
the enhanced methodology with ﬁltering, and considers the top 400
users as students in HS1. Examining the column for 400 students in
Table 4, we see that with this choice of threshold, 272 (84%) of the
325 students are included in the set. So with this threshold, the third
party ﬁnds 84% of the high school student body (having Facebook
accounts) with 128 false positives (32%). Moreover, of these 272
students, 250 (92%) have been classiﬁed in the correct graduation
year. If the third party wants to reduce the false positives, the third
party can declare only the top 200 users as students, in which case
there are only 25 (13%) false positives, with 54% of the students
found, of which 90% are classiﬁed in the correct graduation year. If
the third party can accept a larger number of false positives, he may
instead choose the top 500 students, which would include 92% of
the high school student body having Facebook accounts. We show
these estimates for different choices of threshold t for the enhanced
methodology with ﬁltering in Figure 1.

The results of obtaining 84% of the students in the high school,
of which 92% are classiﬁed in the correct year, with 32% false
positives are remarkable, particularly when considering the 10-15%
annual churn rate at the high school. Many students attend HS1 for
a short period of time. They make friends with the other students
during their period of study, then their families move to another
city. We manually inspected the 128 false positives (from the set
of top 400 users) and found that about half of them were former
students at HS1. For the other half of the false positives, they make
very little public information available, so it is difﬁcult to determine

410High school

# of students

# of students
on Facebook

Table 2: Seeds, core users, and candidates for the three high schools

# of seeds

# of core users

# of

# of extended

HS1
HS2
HS3

362

1, 500 (approx)
1, 500 (approx)

325
N/A
N/A

352
1, 559
1, 532

18
70
46

Table 3: Measurement effort

candidates

core users

6, 282
14, 317
11, 736

22
152
178

HTTP requests Proﬁle Requests for
friend lists

for seeds

Total requests

Total requests

for basic methodology

for enhanced methodology

Facebook

accounts used

HS1
HS2
HS3

2
4
4

34
101
90

pages
352
1, 559
1, 532

360
1, 400
920

746
3, 060
2, 542

1, 576
7, 700
8, 182

if they are former students or not (although most likely are since
they have a large number of friends in HS1).

5.5 Results for HS2 and HS3

For each of the two large public high schools, in order to evaluate
the performance of the basic and enhanced methodologies, we col-
lected a ﬁrst set of seeds with four Facebook accounts and a second
set of seeds with an additional four accounts. We use the ﬁrst set of
seeds in the methodologies; we use the second set for evaluation.
Speciﬁcally, for HS2, from the second set of seeds we obtained 43
users who specify they are currently at HS2 and are not included in
the ﬁrst set of seeds. To evaluate the methodologies, we check to
see which of these 43 test users are in our inferred set, and which
of those are classiﬁed in the correct graduation year. For HS3, we
obtained 47 such test users.

We now describe our methodology for evaluating performance
with limited ground-truth information. Let xt be the number of test
users found in the top t. For the basic methodology, the set of actual
high-school students discovered for a threshold t has two disjoint
groups: (i) the core users; and (ii) the non-core high-school stu-
dents who are discovered. The fraction of non-core high-school
students who are discovered is given by p = non-core HS students
discovered/non-core HS students. This fraction can be estimated
by (xt/# test users). Thus, an estimate of the number of students
in the high school found with a threshold t is:

# of core users +

xt

# test users

× (HS size - # of core users)

(For the enhanced methodology we replace the number of core
users with the number of extended core users.) To estimate the
percentage of high-school students found for threshold t, we divide
the above by the high-school size. To estimate the number of false
positives for a threshold t, we use

t −

xt

# test users

× (HS size - # of core users),

since the false positives are those users among the top-t minus the
expected number of students found in the the top-t (excluding the
core users). To estimate the percentage of false positives for a
threshold t, we divide the above by # of core users + t. We show
these estimates for the enhanced methodology with ﬁltering in Fig-
ure 2. For example, for HS2, the top 1,652 users (t = 1500 plus
the extended core users), the third party can obtain 85% of all the
HS2 students with 22% false positives in the set of 1,652 users. On
the whole, the results in Figure 2 for HS2 and HS3 are similar to
those in Figure 1 for HS1.

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

d
n
u
o

f
 
s
t
n
e
d
u

t
s
 
f

 

o
e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

0
500

% of students found for HS2
% of false positives for HS2
% of students found for HS3
% of false positives for HS3

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

2000

Top t value

Figure 2: Overall performance of enhanced methodology for
HS2 and HS3

5.6 Summary of Results

As discussed in Section 2, when using Facebook’s Find Friends
Portal to search for users in a target high school, Facebook takes
precautions to protect minors by not returning any registered mi-
nors. We have shown that a third party, with relatively little crawl-
ing effort, can discover the majority of the students at the target
high school. For example, we obtained 83%, 85% and 79% of all
the students in HS1, HS2, and HS3, respectively, with false-positive
rates of 32%, 22% and 29%. Moreover, for each high school stu-
dent in the list, the third party can determine the student’s gradua-
tion year with a high-level of accuracy. A third party can then cre-
ate proﬁles with varying degrees of information for the high-school
students, as well as a variety of means to contact the students, as
described in the Appendix, our preliminary analysis indicates that
the attack applies to Google+ as well.

6. EXTENDING THE PROFILES

Recall that when a stranger visits the Facebook page of a minor,
in the philosophy of Facebook’s current privacy policy, the stranger
should see minimal information, which at most includes the mi-
nor’s full name, proﬁle photo, gender, and networks. However,
due to statistical inference and many minors registering as adults, a
third party can leverage OSNs to signiﬁcantly extend the proﬁles.
We now quantify the amount of additional proﬁle information is

411Table 4: Results for HS1 (which has 325 Facebook users)

Basic methodology without ﬁltering
Basic methodology with ﬁltering
Enhanced methodology without ﬁltering
Enhanced methodology with ﬁltering

Top 200
140/112
148/122
169/155
175/158

Top 300
206/162
196/165
231/211
232/211

Top 400
271/224
259/227
261/239
272/250

Top 500
301/254
299/264
304/281
299/276

Table 5: Extending the proﬁle for minors registered as adults

# minors registered as adults
entire friend list public
avg # of friends for users who make friend list public
public search enabled
Message link
relationship info
interested in
birthday
average # of photos shared

700

960

HS1 HS2 HS3
112
795
73% 77% 87%
405
908
71% 80% 86%
89% 86% 91%
15% 26% 34%
13% 20% 33%
6%
9%
19
57

4%
51

readily available to the third party. We do this separately for two
classes of minors: those who are registered minors, and those who
are registered adults. Again, we do this for the users classiﬁed in
the ﬁrst three years of high school (since some of the fourth year
students are adults).

6.1 Extending Proﬁles of Registered Minors

Suppose the attacker applies the methodologies in this paper to
all the high schools in a city. Then for most of the high-school stu-
dents in that city, in addition to the minimal information (full name,
proﬁle photo, gender, and occasionally networks), we have shown
that a third party can infer current high school and graduation year.
From the inferred high school, the third party can also infer home-
town and current city, and from graduation year the third party can
further estimate the minor’s birth year.

Moreover, the third party can use “reverse lookup” to obtain par-
tial friend lists of all the discovered high-school students. Speciﬁ-
cally, after obtaining a set H of (likely) current students at the target
high school, the third party downloads the friend lists for all users
in H whose friend lists are publicly available. A student in H, say
Alice, without a public friend list, will typically be in the friend lists
of other students in H who make their friend lists public. With this
information, the third party can determine at least a portion of Al-
ice’s friends. We applied reverse lookup to the registered minors in
HS1 and the inferred registered minors in HS2 and HS3. For each
of these minors we were able to create friend lists. In particular, we
found on average 38, 141, 129 friends per registered minor in HS1,
HS2, and HS3. (On average HS1 students have fewer high-school
friends since it is a much smaller high school.)

In summary, for each registered minor discovered through high-
school proﬁling, the third party can create a proﬁle with full name,
proﬁle photo, gender, a large subset of friends, high school, gradua-
tion year, hometown, and an estimate of birth year. This is substan-
tially more information than what Facebook makes publicly avail-
able, no matter how the registered minor conﬁgures her privacy
settings. As discussed in Section 2, this information can serve as
a base for creating more comprehensive proﬁles, by matching the
information with public records and other online sources.

We brieﬂy remark that reverse lookup will only obtain a subset of
the registered minor’s high school friends. In particular, it will not
identify friendship relations between two registered minors, since
the friend lists of both minors is unavailable to a stranger. Although
not explored in this paper, it is possible to infer a friendship link be-
tween two registered minors by examining the number of common
friends they have (with the common friends determined by reverse
lookup). For example, for two registered minors Alice and Bob,
let FA and FB, respectively, be their friends obtained by reverse
lookup. We can then compute the Jacquard index between Alice
and Bob:

J(A, B) =

FA ∩ FB
FA ∪ FB

If J(A, B) is high, Alice and Bob are very likely to be friends.
In this way, we can also ﬁnd the hidden friendship links among
registered minors, and more generally between any two users for
which their friend lists are not publicly available.

6.2 Extending Proﬁles of Minors Registered

as Adults

We now examine here the additional information that a third
party can obtain for a minor who is registered as an adult. In this
case, signiﬁcantly more information is often directly available, de-
pending on how the user has conﬁgured her privacy settings. Pos-
sible additional information that can be collected by a stranger —
beyond the information a third party can obtain and infer for a reg-
istered minor — includes shared photos, photo tags, full friend list,
relationship info, interested in, wall postings, likes, favorites, po-
litical views, religious views, videos, links, website, birthday and
contact info (such as personal email address, IM screen name, ad-
dress, phone number). For HS1, HS2, and HS3 we determined
how much additional information is available for some of these at-
tributes. The results are shown in Table 5.

A stranger can obtain a signiﬁcant amount of information about
a registered minor, as we saw in the previous subsection. But the
stranger can often obtain even more information for a minor regis-
tered as an adult. For example, as shown in Table 5, a third party
can obtain on average over 50 shared photos in the two large high
schools, and has access to the “Message” link for more than 86%
of the minors registered as adults in all three high schools.

4127. HOW ONLINE PRIVACY LAWS CAN AC-

7.2 Apples-to-Apples Comparison

TUALLY INCREASE MINORS’ RISK

We now estimate how much privacy leakage there would be for
minors in a world without the COPPA law. Without COPPA, there
would be no age restrictions so that children under 13 could create
accounts without having to lie about their ages. Although some
children might still lie as a joke, the frequency of such occurrences
would likely be much smaller. In this without-COPPA analysis, we
will assume all users register with their actual birth dates. We also
assume the OSN maintains the same privacy policy for minors as
it does today — in particular, (i) when searching for users who
attended a target high school or live in a target city, the OSN does
not return registered minors; (ii) the OSN displays only minimal
information on a minor’s public proﬁle page.

We now address two questions in the context of a world without
COPPA. First, for a given target high school, can a third party still
ﬁnd a set of OSN users such that (a) most of the students in the set
attend the target high school (low false positive rate), and (b) the
list contains most of students attending the high school (high cov-
erage)? Second, for the students in the set, can a third party create
proﬁles that go signiﬁcantly beyond the minimal public proﬁles?
As we have seen, in a world with the COPPA law, the answer to
both of these questions is yes. But to what extent is it also true in a
world without COPPA?

In high-school proﬁling (with COPPA), a key component is dis-
covering a set of “core” users who currently attend the target high
school and have friend lists. Finding such a core set is facilitated
by the fact that some minors are registered adults since they lied
about their ages when creating accounts (when they were under
13). Because Facebook treats these minors as adults, not only are
they easier to ﬁnd, but their friend lists are often public, thereby
also making their classmates easier to ﬁnd. However, in our mod-
iﬁed world without COPPA, such core users become more difﬁcult
to locate, since no minors would appear in search results.

7.1 A Natural Approach in a COPPA-less

World

Nevertheless, even in a world where everyone registers with their
actual birth date, it would still be possible to locate some candidate
minors. Here we discuss one natural mechanism to do this. Be-
cause many young adults (18-20 years old) will likely have friends
who are a few years younger than them, if the third party can
ﬁnd the young adults who recently graduated from the target high
school and collect their friends, the third party could create a list
that contains minors in the target high school. Speciﬁcally, we sup-
pose the third party takes the following natural approach:

1. Obtain a set of users who are adults and have recently gradu-
ated from the target high school (or are adults in the last year
of high school). Call the subset of these users who make their
friend lists publicly available the core users.

2. Obtain the public proﬁles of all the friends of all the core
users. Call the union of all these friends the candidate set.
Most likely, the candidate set would contain many minors in
the target high school.

3. All the minors (and some adults) will have minimal public
proﬁles. To narrow down the candidate set, ﬁlter out all users
who do not have minimal public proﬁles.

4. To further narrow down the candidate set, additionally ﬁlter
out all users who have fewer than n friends in the core set.
The third party then considers this ﬁltered set H as the mi-
nors in the target high school.

We now evaluate how successful this approach would be for a
world without COPPA, and compare the success rates with those
obtained in Section 5 for the world with COPPA. One of the chal-
lenges in this evaluation is that we are not able to collect data for
the world without COPPA. If we apply the above heuristic to our
existing data, then the above heuristic will not ﬁnd any of the mi-
nors registered as adults; however, if we were applying the heuristic
to actual without-COPPA data, more minors would be found since
more minors would have minimal public proﬁles. In order to make
a mostly apples-to-apples comparison, we therefore compare the
number of minimal proﬁle students obtained by the above heuristic
for the without-COPPA case with the number of minimal proﬁle
students obtained in Section 5 for the with-COPPA case. We make
this comparison for HS1, for which we have ground truth informa-
tion. Recall HS1 has 325 students with Facebook accounts. Of
these 325 students, 148 have minimal public proﬁles (22, 47, 45,
and 34 students in 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, respectively). We
now investigate how many of these 148 students are discovered in
the two cases.

First consider the without-COPPA case. We will use students
who have graduated in 2010 and 2011 to discover students grad-
uating in 2012-2015, using the same data we used in Section 5,
which was collected in March 2012. Speciﬁcally, using the HS1
data obtained from the high-school search, we ﬁnd 52 users who
indicate their graduation year as either 2010 or 2011 for HS1 and
publicly make available their friend lists. These 52 users become
our “core set”. We then apply the heuristic above. For n = 1, we
have |H| = 4, 572 ﬁltered candidates and among these candidates,
92 of them are in the ground truth data set. Thus, n = 1 gives 62%
of the minimal-proﬁle ground-truth students with 4, 480 false pos-
itives. The results for n = 1, 2, 3 are shown in Figure 3.

Now consider the with-COPPA case. For any t value, we need
to determine the number of minimal proﬁle students found and the
number of false positives. Let Mt be the set of top-t users from
Section 5 who have minimal proﬁles. The number of minimal pro-
ﬁle students, zt, is the number of students from Mt who are in
the ground-truth set. The number of false positives is given by
|Mt| − zt. For t = 300, 165 users have minimal proﬁles of which
95 are in the ground truth data set. Thus, t = 300 gives 64% of the
minimal-proﬁle ground-truth students with 70 false positives. The
results for t = 300, 400, 500 are shown in Figure 3.

As shown in Figure 3, we see that without-COPPA, for obtain-
ing the same number of minors as with-COPPA, the third party has
many more false positives. For example, with-COPPA gives 64%
of the HS1 students with 70 false positives; without-COPPA gives
62% of the HS1 students with 4, 480 false positives. Similarly, for
the same number of false-positives, without-COPPA ﬁnds signiﬁ-
cantly fewer students. For example, with-COPPA gives 91% of the
HS1 students with 170 false positives; without-COPPA only gives
29% of the HS1 students with 186 false positives.

7.3 Proﬁle Creation in a COPPA-less World

Having shown that, without COPPA, the third party ﬁnds sig-
niﬁcantly fewer students for the same number of false positives,
we now address the second question, namely, for the students in
the guess set H, can the third party create proﬁles that go signif-
icantly beyond the minimal public proﬁles that Facebook displays
for registered minors? Recall that the minimal proﬁle at most con-
tains name, proﬁle picture and gender. In the without-COPPA case,
using the heuristic above, the third party would be able to aug-
ment this minimal proﬁle with high school using the target high
school, although his level of conﬁdence would be signiﬁcantly less

4134
10

3
10

Without−COPPA
With−COPPA

l

)
e
a
c
s
 

g
o
l
(
 
s
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P
e
s
a
F

 

l

2
10

 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

With reverse lookup
Without reverse lookup

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

d
n
u
o

f
 
s
t

n
e
d
u

t
s
 
f

o

 

e
g
a

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

1
10

20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100

Percentage of Students Found

20

200

250

300

350

400

450

500

Top t value

Figure 3: For HS1, False Positives Found With-COPPA vs.
Without-COPPA

Figure 4: Percentage of HS1 students found with and without
reverse lookup

because of the large number of false positives. Moreover,the third
party would not be able to easily determine the student’s gradua-
tion year, and the third party would not be able to create a friend
list that includes students in the same year, as is the case for with-
COPPA. Thus, in the without-COPPA case, using the techniques
in this paper, the third party would not be able to construct a pro-
ﬁle beyond the minimal proﬁle plus (a low-conﬁdence guess of)
the high school. In the with-COPPA case, a third party can obtain
additional proﬁle information for all minors: speciﬁcally, gradua-
tion year and high-school friend lists for registered minors; gradua-
tion year, high-school friend lists and often much more information
(e.g., complete friend lists and shared photos) for minors registered
as adults. Furthermore, for the without-COPPA case, a third party
would not be able to send Facebook messages to any of the minors
(unlike the with-COPPA case).

In summary, we can conclude that an indirect result of COPPA is
that a third party not only can discover more minors, but can also
build much more extensive proﬁles than what would be the case in
a world without COPPA.

8. COUNTERMEASURES

In an ideal world, policymakers would enact laws and OSNs
would take measures so that (i) it would be difﬁcult for third parties
to discover minors in targeted geographical regions and construct
detailed proﬁles of those minors; while at the same time, (ii) pro-
viding a highly usable service for minors and adults alike. Design-
ing and evaluating all combinations of possible laws and measures
is a major research problem on its own. In this paper we examine
just one promising countermeasure — namely, disabling reverse
lookup — and quantify the reduction in privacy leakage.

With reverse lookup disabled, if a user’s friend list is hidden from
strangers (either because the user has conﬁgured his friend list as
such or because the user is a registered minor), then that user would
not be visible to strangers in any other user’s friend list. If the OSN
takes this countermeasure, users with hidden friendlist will not be
found using reverse lookup, thereby reducing privacy leakages. To
evaluate the effectiveness of this measure, we estimate its impact
on HS1, for which we have ground-truth information. Out of 325
ground-truth users of HS1, 112 of them make their friend list pub-
licly available. For the remaining users, the friend list is not pub-
licly available to strangers, and these users, by assumption, cannot
be found via reverse lookup. So in evaluating this countermeasure,

we remove these users from the candidate set and then proceed with
the methodology steps.

Figure 4 shows the results of the enhanced methodology with
ﬁltering for HS1 with and without reverse lookup. From the results,
it is clear that performance of high-school proﬁling methodology
decreases signiﬁcantly. For example, by removing reverse lookup,
the percentage of students found in the top-500 decreases from the
92% to 33%.

9. RELATED WORK

There are several earlier studies on the usage of OSNs by minors,
both for minors (under 18) and underage users (under 13). In 2010,
Pew Research released a report stating that 73% of online Ameri-
can teens ages 12 to 17 used an OSN website [20]. In 2011, Pew
released another report, with collaborators at Cable in the Class-
room and the Family Online Safety Institute, where it was found
that 44% of online teens admit to having lied about their age so
they could access a Web site or sign up for an online account [19].
Similar results have been reported for European teens [21]. Boyd et
al. [15] provided survey data showing that many parents know their
underage children are on Facebook in violation of the site’s restric-
tions, and that they are often complicit in helping their children join
the site. More recently, Pew Research found that teens and adults
have no signiﬁcant variations for their privacy settings [22]. These
reports collectively provide great insight into behavioral character-
istics of minors and their parents. None of these reports, however,
address automated discovery and proﬁling of minors. Our mea-
surement work shows that because minors often lie to circumvent
the age restriction, they put themselves and their non-lying high-
school friends at risk for a variety of potential online and in-person
abuses.

There is substantial previous work on using statistical inference
to infer private information about OSN users. Zheleva and Getoor
[28] proposed techniques to predict gender and political views of
users in four real-world datasets (including Facebook) using gen-
eral relational classiﬁcation and group-based classiﬁcation. Jerni-
gan and Mistree [17] demonstrated a method for accurately predict-
ing the sexual orientation of Facebook users by analyzing friend-
ship associations. Other papers have also examined inferring pri-
vate information from social networks. Thomas et al. examined
scenarios where conﬂicting privacy settings between friends will

414reveal information that at least one user intending to remain private
[24]. Becker and Chen [14] inferred many different attributes of
Facebook users, including afﬁliation, age, country, degree of edu-
cation, employer, high school name and grad year, political view,
relationship status, university and zip code using the most popular
attribute values of the user’s friends. Dey et al. [16] examined a
large dataset and develop a methodology to estimate ages of Face-
book users. Mislove et al. [23] proposed a method of inferring user
attributes by detecting communities in social networks, based on
the observation that users with common attributes form dense com-
munities. Recently Kosinski et al. [18] showed how Facebook likes
can be used to predict a range of highly sensitive personal attributes
automatically.

All of the above studies focus on inferring information about
adults. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper that identiﬁes the
privacy problem in OSNs for minors, and also the ﬁrst paper to
quantify the extent of the privacy leakage. The problem is chal-
lenging since, for registered minors, little information, including
friend lists, is available to the third party. This is also the ﬁrst pa-
per to measure the additional third-party privacy disclosure risk for
minors due to the enactment of the COPPA law.

10. CONCLUSION

In this measurement study we have shown how a privacy law for
protecting children’s privacy (along with the fact that OSNs do not
verify users’ ages) can inadvertently increase minor’s exposure to
third parties. Facebook and other Online Social Networks (OSNs)
take precautions to prevent strangers from using their services to
extensively proﬁle minors. But because a signiﬁcant fraction of mi-
nors lie about their ages, we show how many of the precautions can
be circumvented, putting both lying and truthful minors at risk. For
a given target high school, we described a methodology to proﬁle
the current students in the high school. The methodology ﬁnds the
majority of the students in the school, and for each student builds
a proﬁle that includes information that is not normally available to
strangers, including current city, current school, graduation year,
high-school friends, and estimated birth year. As described in Sec-
tion 6, the proﬁles of about half students (those who have lied about
their ages) also include a varying amount of additional information,
including shared photos and wall postings.

We estimated how much privacy leakage would occur in a world
without an age restriction and compared the estimate to our mea-
sured results for current world with the age restriction. Our results
show that a third party not only can discover more minors, but can
also build more extensive proﬁles than what would be the case in
a world without an age restriction. Thus, in terms of third-party
privacy intrusion, a component of the COPPA law actually puts
minors at greater risk than they would be if the law had never been
enacted.

Although the age restriction in the COPPA law indirectly exac-
erbates the third party privacy problem for minors, we are certainly
not arguing that governments should abandon enacting laws to pro-
tect the online privacy of children. We believe, however, that the
laws must be carefully designed and consider leakages to third-
parties as well as to ﬁrst-parties.

11. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported in part by the NSF (under grant 0966187).

The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of
the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily represent-
ing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied, of any of the
sponsors.

12. REFERENCES
[1] Age requirements on Google Accounts. http://

support.google.com/accounts/bin/answer.
py?hl=en&answer=1350409, accessed May 7, 2013.
[2] Find Friends Portal. https://www.facebook.com/

find-friends/browser/, accessed May 7, 2013.

[3] Google+ Search by School Portal. https://plus.
google.com/circles/school, accessed May 7,
2013.

[4] Google+ Teen Safety Guide - Features for teens. http://

support.google.com/plus/bin/answer.py?
hl=en&answer=2409072, accessed May 7, 2013.
[5] How Does Privacy Work for Minors? http://www.

facebook.com/help/?page=214189648617074,
accessed May 7, 2013.

[6] Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act, 1998. http://

www.ftc.gov/ogc/coppa1.htm, accessed May 7,
2013.

[7] Groups Make Recommendations for Kids’ Facebook,

Adweek, June 18, 2012. http://www.adweek.com/
news/technology/groups-make-
recommendations-kids-facebook-141195.

[8] Creating a Google Plus Account Now Requires You to Enter

Your Birthday, August 27, 2011. http://techie-
buzz.com/social-networking/google-age-
restrictions.html.

[9] Attorney General Kelly announces criminal charges in

elaborate “Facebook" false identity scam targeting young
girls for sex, February 10, 2012. http://www.
attorneygeneral.gov/press.aspx?id=6431.
[10] Do Not Track Kids Act of 2011, May 13, 2011. http://

www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-112hr1895ih/
pdf/BILLS-112hr1895ih.pdf.

[11] Senator Opens Investigation of Data Brokers, The New York
Times, October 10, 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/
2012/10/11/technology/senator-opens-
investigation-of-data-brokers.html.

[12] Update Urged on Children’s Online Privacy, The New York

Times, September 15, 2011. http://www.nytimes.
com/2011/09/16/technology/ftc-proposes-
updates-to-law-on-childrens-online-
privacy.html.

[13] On the Web, Children Face Intensive Tracking, The Wall

Street Journal, September 17, 2010.

[14] J. Becker and H. Chen. Measuring Privacy Risk in Online
Social Networks. In Proceedings of W2SP 2009: Web 2.0
Security and Privacy, 2009.

[15] D. Boyd, E. Hargittai, J. Schultz, and J. Palfrey. Why Parents

Help Their Children Lie to Facebook: Unintended
Consequences of the ‘Children’s Online Privacy Protection
Act’. First Monday, 16(11), November 7, 2011.

[16] R. Dey, C. Tang, K. W. Ross, and N. Saxena. Estimating age
privacy leakage in online social networks. In Proceedings of
the IEEE INFOCOM 2012, Orlando, FL, USA, pages
2836–2840, 2012.

[17] C. Jernigan and B. F. T. Mistree. Gaydar: Facebook

Friendships Expose Sexual Orientation. First Monday,
14(10), 2009.

[18] M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel. Private traits and

attributes are predictable from digital records of human
behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
110(15):5802–5805, Apr. 2013.

415Table 6: Google+: Default and worst-case information available to strangers

Default for
Reg. Minors Reg. Adults

Default for Worst-case for Worst-case for

Reg. Minors

Reg. Adults

X

Name, Proﬁle Picture
Gender, Employment, HS,
Hometown, Current City
Home and Work Phone
Relationship, Looking
Birthday
Photos
Public Search
In Your Circles
Have You in Circles

X

X

X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

user proﬁles. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on World Wide Web, pages 531–540, 2009.

APPENDIX

A. GOOGLE+ AND REGISTERED MINORS
Although the focus of this paper is on Facebook, we brieﬂy men-
tion here that Google+ is also susceptible to high-school student
proﬁling. Like Facebook, to create a Google+ account, the user
must register as 13 years or older [1, 8]. Google+ also provides a
mechanism for searching for users associated with a high school
[3].

Unlike Facebook, Google+, which uses circles, has asymmetric
friendship links. For example, for Alice there is one set of users
in her circle; and there is a second set of users who include her in
their circles. Google+ also provides various safety guidelines for
teens [4]. Google+ registered minors also have different default
privacy settings than do registered adults, as shown in Table 6. It
would also be of interest to examine the privacy settings of minors
in RenRen, a large Chinese social network [27].

[19] A. Lenhart, M. Madden, A. Smith, K. Purcell, K. Zickuhr,

and L. Rainie. Teens, kindness and cruelty on social network
sites, Pew Internet, November 9, 2011. http://
pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/
2011/PIP_Teens_Kindness_Cruelty_SNS_
Report_Nov_2011_FINAL_110711.pdf.

[20] A. Lenhart, K. Purcell, A. Smith, and K. Zickuhr. Social

media and mobile Internet use among teens and young
adults, Pew Internet, February 3, 2010. http://www.
pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/
2010/PIP_Social_Media_and_Young_Adults_
Report_Final_with_toplines.pdf.

[21] S. Livingstone, K. Olafsson, and E. Staksrud. “Social

Networking, Age and Privacy”, EU Kids Online, 2010.
http://www2.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/
research/EUKidsOnline/ShortSNS.pdf.

[22] M. Madden. Privacy management on social media sites, Pew

Internet, February 24, 2012. http://www.
pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/
2012/PIP_Privacy_management_on_social_
media_sites_022412.pdf.

[23] A. Mislove, B. Viswanath, K. P. Gummadi, and P. Druschel.

You are who you know: inferring user proﬁles in online
social networks. In Proceedings of the third ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining,
pages 251–260, 2010.

[24] K. Thomas, C. Grier, and D. M. Nicol. Unfriendly:

multi-party privacy risks in social networks. In Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Privacy enhancing
technologies, pages 236–252, 2010.

[25] B. Viswanath, A. Mislove, M. Cha, and K. P. Gummadi. On
the evolution of user interaction in facebook. In Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM workshop on Online Social Networks, pages
37–42, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.

[26] C. Wilson, A. Sala, K. P. N. Puttaswamy, and B. Y. Zhao.

Beyond social graphs: User interactions in online social
networks and their implications. ACM Trans. Web,
6(4):17:1–17:31, Nov. 2012.

[27] X. Zhao, A. Sala, C. Wilson, X. Wang, S. Gaito, H. Zheng,

and B. Y. Zhao. Multi-scale dynamics in a massive online
social network. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference
on Internet Measurement Conference, pages 171–184, 2012.
[28] E. Zheleva and L. Getoor. To join or not to join: the illusion
of privacy in social networks with mixed public and private

416