Demystifying Porn 2.0: A Look into a Major

Adult Video Streaming Website

Gareth Tyson

Queen Mary, University of

London, UK

gareth.tyson@qmul.ac.uk

Yehia Elkhatib

Lancaster University, UK

yehia@comp.lancs.ac.uk

Nishanth Sastry

King’s College London, UK

nishanth.sastry@kcl.ac.uk

Steve Uhlig

Queen Mary, University of
steve@eecs.qmul.ac.uk

London, UK

ABSTRACT
The Internet has evolved into a huge video delivery infrastructure,
with websites such as YouTube and Netﬂix appearing at the top
of most trafﬁc measurement studies. However, most trafﬁc studies
have largely kept silent about an area of the Internet that (even to-
day) is poorly understood: adult media distribution. Whereas ten
years ago, such services were provided primarily via peer-to-peer
ﬁle sharing and bespoke websites, recently these have converged
towards what is known as “Porn 2.0”. These popular web portals
allow users to upload, view, rate and comment videos for free. De-
spite this, we still lack even a basic understanding of how users
interact with these services. This paper seeks to address this gap
by performing the ﬁrst large-scale measurement study of one of
the most popular Porn 2.0 websites: YouPorn. We have repeatedly
crawled the website to collect statistics about 183k videos, witness-
ing over 60 billion views. Through this, we offer the ﬁrst character-
isation of this type of corpus, highlighting the nature of YouPorn’s
repository. We also inspect the popularity of objects and how they
relate to other features such as the categories to which they belong.
We ﬁnd evidence for a high level of ﬂexibility in the interests of its
user base, manifested in the extremely rapid decay of content pop-
ularity over time, as well as high susceptibility to browsing order.
Using a small-scale user study, we validate some of our ﬁndings
and explore the infrastructure design and management implications
of our observations.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: General—Data Com-
munications
General Terms
Measurement
Keywords
Porn 2.0; Adult websites; Video streaming; Measurements

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC’13, October 23–25, 2013, Barcelona, Spain.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1953-9/13/10 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2504730.2504739 .

1.

INTRODUCTION

The Internet has evolved from a largely web-oriented infrastruc-
ture to a massively distributed content delivery system [27]. Video
content is particularly popular: by 2016, 86% of all Internet trafﬁc
is predicted to be video [5]. This transformation has led to a mul-
titude of research attempts to characterise key video portals and
the corresponding changing consumption patterns. This includes
seminal studies into user-generated content (UGC) [13], video on
demand (VoD) [40], Internet TV (IPTV) [14] and catch-up TV [6,
29]. Thanks to them, our knowledge has been expanded and, in
many cases, the infrastructures improved.

However, there is an elephant in the room: adult video distribu-
tion. Similar to other kinds of content, adult video consumption
has been undergoing dramatic shifts. Traditionally, adult videos
were distributed via pay-per-view websites and within peer-to-peer
communities (e.g., one estimate found that pornography constitutes
up to 18% of the ﬁles on eDonkey in some regions [35]). Re-
cently, however, increasing amounts of trafﬁc are being generated
by emerging YouTube-like websites that provide free on-demand
access to adult videos. These sites term themselves “Porn 2.0”, and
give users the ability to upload, view, rank and comment on videos,
as well as form online proﬁles.

Next to nothing is known about the nature of Porn 2.0, nor the
way users interact with it; little is even known (outside ISPs) about
the actual amount of trafﬁc generated by these sites. Despite this,
its prominence in the Alexa rankings [1] is undeniable, with six
adult websites listed in the top 100, more than any other genre
of video streaming. We conﬁrm the huge scale of adult content
in this paper, where we ﬁnd over 111 million requests to a single
adult website in just a three day period. Considering this scale and
prominence, we believe it crucial to gain a better understanding
of the characteristics of Porn 2.0, and derive principles that could
mitigate its impact on the network.

In this paper, we inspect one of the most popular Porn 2.0 web-
sites: YouPorn [2]. Founded in 2006, it has quickly risen to global
prominence. For the last 5 years, it has been amongst the most
highly ranked sites listed in Alexa, consistently appearing in the
top 100. Due to its large scale, YouPorn provides an ideal case
study of the Internet’s expanding adult video market.

We repeatedly crawled the YouPorn website to extract informa-
tion about the videos being created and watched. The entire corpus
consists of 183k videos, consisting of footage spanning in excess
of 3 years. Over their lifetime, these videos collected more than 60
billion views, conﬁrming YouPorn’s huge popularity. In the last 7

417days of the traces alone, 912 new videos were added and viewed
over 38 million times.

Using this data, we characterise the corpus, highlighting how
users interact with various aspects of the system. Further, we make
a number of observations that provide evidence of its speciﬁc prop-
erties compared to other types of media. Because our data does not
provide information about users’ personal intentions, we further
augment our data with a small scale user study (46 participants) to
reﬂect upon the reasons behind our ﬁndings.

One running theme in many of our ﬁndings is that despite being
consciously constructed as an adult site comparable to YouTube,
YouPorn differs from traditional UGC sites (e.g., YouTube, Vimeo)
in two key ways. First, the number of user-driven content uploads
on YouPorn is comparatively low. Indeed, YouPorn itself has up-
loaded 36% of the overall corpus. Second, despite the lower num-
ber of videos, each video gets many more views, on average, than
more mainstream UGC sites. This smaller, more popular content
corpus suggests lower operating costs for such websites.

Another theme is that users appear to be ﬂexible about which
videos they consume. Whilst we verify this independently using a
small scale user study, our dataset reveals that this user ﬂexibility
manifests itself in two unexpected ways, both of which point to the
importance of helping users to locate content. First, although adult
video content is not expected to age with time, unlike temporally-
sensitive genres such as news or weather, most of the views are gar-
nered in the ﬁrst days after upload. We demonstrate that browsing
order is a strong factor that affects the number of views obtained:
easy to ﬁnd videos collect most views. Second, we ﬁnd that the
number of categories a video appears in strongly correlates with
the number of views it obtains. Videos which are not categorised
suffer severely. We also discover that no attempt is made by You-
Porn at engineering the content of individual categories: in many
cases, highly populated categories have too few videos.

A list of contributions and paper roadmap follows:

1. We offer, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst large-scale
measurement study into so-called “Porn 2.0” adult video dis-
tribution on the Internet. We present our dataset in Section 3
consisting of over 60 billion views. We will make the data
publicly available.

2. We provide a detailed analysis of key characteristics of adult
video content (Section 4), as well as the way in which users
interact with this type of corpus and its various categories
(Sections 5 and 6).

3. We explore the reasons behind our ﬁndings through discus-
sions fuelled by a user study (Section 7). Using this, we
explore potential improvements that would beneﬁt both net-
work operators and content providers.

2. RELATED WORK

Pornography is anecdotally the most searched for content on the
Internet. Many theories exist to explain this. Cooper [16] attributes
this to the Internet’s “triple-A-engine”: Accessibility, Affordabil-
ity, Anonymity. Suler [36] expands this into 6 factors, coined as
the online disinhibition effect. Whereas, much work has gone into
looking at who engages in online sexual activities and why they
do so [12, 20], little is known about about the actual engines that
underpin its distribution, especially the expanding Porn 2.0 phe-
nomenon. This has seen websites emerging (e.g., YouPorn [2]) that
allow users to upload, view, rate and comment on videos for free,
much like YouTube does.

Name
Snapshot
3 Day
Daily

Period

28/02/2013
3/03/2013

1/03 – 4/05/2013

# Vids
183,639
183,591

1656

# Views
61 billion
111 million
96 million

Table 1: Overview of datasets.

A few studies have provided estimates of the demand handled
by these websites. For example, Ogas and Gaddam [30] mention
that Porn 2.0 sites such as Pornhub, RedTube, xHamster and You-
Porn can gain up to 16 million views per month. This is a very
conservative estimate compared to YouPorn’s report of 100 million
page views a day [3]. Other estimates have suggested that sites
like YouPorn have a peak trafﬁc rate of 800 Gbps [7]. Despite all
this evidence, we still have quite a rudimentary understanding of
the true scale of these services. Regardless, most experts agree that
Porn 2.0 is a huge emerging economy that is not, as of yet, fully
understood [17, 9, 21, 39, 30].

With this in mind, it is surprising to ﬁnd next to nothing re-
ported on the (systems-level) nature and operation of online adult
multimedia delivery services. Instead, various research communi-
ties have focussed on speciﬁc sub-components such as automated
recognition and classiﬁcation [28, 25]; pornographic practices, com-
munities and subcultures [9]; interest recommendations [34]; se-
curity issues [39]; and illegal content dissemination [26]. To our
knowledge, this paper presents the ﬁrst large-scale systems-perspective
study of an online adult multimedia delivery service. We believe
this work to be crucial, considering the increasing prominence of
video distribution [5], of which adult media will likely continue to
make up a signiﬁcant proportion in the future [35]. That said, there
are a multitude of studies into more traditional video streaming sys-
tems that already provide some insight. These include catch-up TV
[6, 29], user generated content [13, 41], VoD [40] and IPTV [14,
22, 24]. Studies such as these have provided a range of insights,
including content popularity models [23], optimised caching tech-
niques [6] and improved delivery schemes [8]. As of yet, however,
we are unaware as to how these principles apply to adult media
systems. The rest of this paper therefore explores this topic.

Note that we do not make a sociological statement within our
work; nor do we espouse the proliferation of pornographic media.
We are interested in such media’s impact on the network and, as
such, we believe it is important to gain a better understanding of its
characteristics.

3. YOUPORN DATASET

We crawled the YouPorn website to obtain information about its
corpus and user base. Each video offered is accompanied by meta-
data that we extract. This metadata includes the number of views,
the video rating, the number of ratings received, the upload date,
the user who uploaded the video, the number of comments, and any
categorical information. To collect this information, we performed
a number of separate crawls, embodied within three datasets, sum-
marised in Table 1.

Our ﬁrst dataset, which we term the snapshot trace, contains in-
formation about all videos in the corpus (183, 639), collected on
the 28/02/2013. We observe over 60 billion views of videos with
durations collectively spanning in excess of 3 years. To augment
this, we also collected a second dataset, which we term the 3 day
trace. To obtain it, we re-crawled the same videos 3 days later
(3/03/2013). It contained 183,591 videos, 48 having been removed.
Using the 3 day trace, we calculated the evolution of all quantitative
metadata including popularity.

418The mentioned traces provide two “snapshots” of all videos on
YouPorn. This, however, does not give much insight into the tem-
poral properties of individual videos. We have therefore also per-
formed smaller-scale periodic crawlings to collect a time series of
snapshots. The third dataset, which we term daily, traced 2172
videos added between the period of 1/03/2013 – 4/05/2013. For
each video added, we retrieved all metadata on a daily basis to
study how it evolved, offering insights into the lifetime of each
video. From the full set, we ﬁltered the entries to leave only com-
plete videos in which we had in excess of 21 days recorded. This
left 1656 videos with an accumulated set of 96 million views.

4. CHARACTERISING CONTENT CORPUS
In this section, we investigate the content corpus offered by You-
Porn. We traced 183, 639 videos within the corpus dating from
September 2006. This constitutes their entire video repository, as
available at the time of writing.
4.1 Content duration

First, we inspect the duration of videos within YouPorn, pre-
sented as a cumulative distribution function (CDF) in Figure 1.1
We observe from Figure 1 that most videos are rather short. About
80% are shorter than 15 minutes, with a very small fraction of them
exceeding 45 minutes. If we divide them into 1 minute time ranges,
the largest bucket is the 5–6 minutes, which contains 25% of all
videos. This propensity could have emerged for a number of rea-
sons. An obvious one is the presence of commercial videos that are
intended to advertise content from other (e.g., pay-based) websites.
Such users tend to upload short previews of longer videos in an at-
tempt to entice users to their websites. YouPorn allows banners to
be placed below videos to better enable this. It also appears that
many other videos only contain relatively short scenes, without the
sorts of preambles seen in other media types. Practically speaking,
the corpus therefore appears very much like a convenient “pick and
mix” repository where users can select snippets of videos that suit
their interests rather than watching entire ﬁlms. Whereas the rea-
sons for this style of viewing could be diverse, it is important to
note that Alexa reports the average viewing time on YouPorn as
only ≈9 minutes [1]. With such time limitations, uploaders (partic-
ularly commercial ones) must ensure that only the most interesting
elements of their ﬁlms are seen by viewers. Lastly, Figure 1 also
shows the duration of videos weighted by the number of times they
are watched. The curves are near identical, indicating that users do
not have a particular preference for one duration but, rather, watch
various durations equally often.
4.2 Content injection

An extremely important component of Porn 2.0 is the injection
of content by users. We therefore inspect the frequency at which
videos are uploaded into the corpus. Indeed, the short durations of
the videos could come with signiﬁcant churn to sustain the interest
of the user base. Figure 2 ﬁrst provides a CDF of the number of
daily video uploads. On average, only 78 videos are added per day,
a surprisingly modest ﬁgure compared to sites such as YouTube [4].
This low daily injection rate therefore suggests that rapid corpus
expansion is not necessarily vital for the success of this platform.
As a comparison, already in 2008, YouTube was reported to have
well over 140 million videos — over 700 times more than You-
Porn’s current corpus of 183,639 videos. Despite this, according

1Some videos had bogus length ﬁelds (e.g., 1000 hours). Con-
sequently, we manually removed all entries above 3 hours (74
videos), leaving 99.99% of the videos in the trace.

Figure 1: CDF of content duration.

Figure 2: CDF of daily content uploads.

to Alexa, the number of pageviews for YouTube is just 100 times
more than for YouPorn. This suggests that sheer volume of content
is not necessary for the success of adult video streaming services.
That said, Figure 2 does highlight that the number of daily uploads
has increased notably over time, with an average rate of about 140
over the last 3 months of the trace.

Beyond these absolute ﬁgures, we also examine who uploads
content. We ﬁnd that only 5, 849 distinct usernames have ever up-
loaded over the entire 6 year history of YouPorn. Note this includes
“Unknown” users with anonymous uploads (33k videos). Further-
more, as indicated in Figure 3, most users (56%) upload only a
single video, with the majority (80%) uploading at most 5. Fig-
ure 3 also presents the number of submissions per user in the “am-

Figure 3: CDF of per user video uploads.

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10153045607590CDFDuration (mins)Per videoWeighted by views 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200CDFVideo Injection Rate (per day)Full3 Months 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 20 40 60 80 100CDFNumber of Submissions (per-user)All CategoriesAmateur419ateur” category, which one would initially imagine to have a far
more proactive user-base. Even this category, however, shows very
few uploads. In fact, overall, we observe 75 days during which no
content was uploaded whatsoever.

This observation led us to perform manual inspection to better
understand the nature of the uploads. We found that many uploads
were actually provided by commercial producers. This observation
extends to all categories, even “amateur”. Figure 4 presents the
daily upload rates over the entirety of YouPorn’s existence. An up-
wards trend can be seen, suggesting an expanding base of upload-
ers. Investigation of these uploaders shows that 36% of the con-
tent is actually uploaded by YouPorn itself; a process that started
almost 2 years after YouPorn’s inception, with 39 videos, on aver-
age, being injected each day. These are all professional videos that
are typically produced by a listed production studio. We conjec-
ture that this may have been initiated, in part, to ensure a sufﬁcient
number of daily uploads. Regardless of the underlying reason, af-
ter YouPorn started uploading content, we observe that every day
has new uploads, showing that YouPorn’s own contributions have
had a signiﬁcant impact. In fact, without these contributions, the
overall average daily upload rates would drop massively from 78
to 50 video per day. This can be seen in Figure 4 with extremely
predictable and sustained upload rates boosting the overall uploads
after year 2. Our observations therefore suggest that YouPorn is
closer to a commercial platform than a user generated one.

tus page, allowing us to ascertain the current status of each video
upload.

Figure 5 shows the number of removals we observed across the
measured identiﬁer space. On average, we found that 11.7% of
the content is removed. A number of notable spikes can also be
seen; for example, we found that all videos were removed from
a speciﬁc 1k identiﬁer block. Manual inspection revealed many
videos with production studios in their titles, suggesting possible
copyright issues.

From this, one might assume that the majority of videos become
active in the repository. However, we discovered other possible
video statuses beyond “active” and “removed”. We found a large
number of videos that were classiﬁed as being “processed”2. This
state is allocated to a video during the initial stages of its life when
it is being encoded. It is therefore curious as to why many videos
do not proceed beyond this state; on average, 61% of videos are
still being processed even after several months of existence. We
strongly suspect that some sort of (potentially manual) vetting pro-
cedure takes place. Consequently, only a minority of uploads are
actually accepted for publication on YouPorn: only 18% of videos
are active in the identiﬁer range we studied. This also offers some
explanation as to why the injection rates in YouPorn (particularly
historic ones) are lower than could be expected for a repository of
its prominence. Further, the need to vet content might also offer
insight into why YouPorn started to upload a large number of its
own videos.

Figure 4: Breakdown for daily Upload rates (with and without
YouPorn’s contributions): During the ﬁrst two years of You-
Porn’s existence, there were days without any new uploads. Af-
ter this YouPorn itself has been uploading new videos, leading
to a notable increase in the number of new uploads, suggesting
that much of the content is not user-generated.

4.3 Content removal

So far, we have seen the number of videos added to YouPorn
each day. An equally important aspect is how many videos are re-
moved. Unlike most user generated content sites, YouPorn does not
offer a straightforward way for users to remove their own content
after upload. Instead, all removals must be requested — measuring
removal levels therefore provides strong insight into the amount of
content that deviates from YouPorn’s policies (e.g., copyright is-
sues).

YouPorn allocates each video a unique numerical identiﬁer. These
are selected from an incrementing pool of time-dependent iden-
tiﬁers. We surveyed a large range of the identiﬁer space to col-
lect the status of each video therein. We incrementally crawled all
video identiﬁers between 7, 692, 093 and 8, 300, 674 in 1K blocks;
this range covers March 2012–2013. Each identiﬁer returns a sta-

Figure 5: Removal rate of content.

4.4 Summary

We conclude that the users of such services do not particularly
require huge novelty from the content available to them. It seems
that a small number of new videos will still satisfy the demand.
However, from the daily video uploads, it seems that the current
user base requires new content to be available every day, forcing
YouPorn to ensure a steady ﬂow. Amongst the uploaded videos,
only a limited fraction become available eventually with ≈ 10%
removed.

5. CONTENT POPULARITY

We have seen that YouPorn is a constantly expanding repository,
with new (typically short) videos being uploaded on a daily basis.
Next, it is important to understand the way in which users interact
with this corpus. Particularly, we are interested in seeing the pop-

2We also note 8.6% of videos in other miscellaneous states, i.e.,
“failed” or “not available”.

 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Number of Videos InjectedYears since YouPorn's first videoAll UploadersWithout YouPornJust YouPorn 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1Fraction RemovedVideo Range in 1k blocks (7692093 - 8300674)420Figure 6: Number of views per video (log-log).

Figure 7: CDF of number of views per video.

ularity of individual objects, as indicated by the number of views
they receive, and their respective importance in YouPorn.
5.1 Popularity: I’ll take anything you’ve got
We begin by looking at the popularity of all videos taken within
our traces. We rely on two different time windows: (i) the entirety
of YouPorn’s existence (cumulative) and (ii) a three day period.

One recurrent property that has been observed across many types
of content repositories is a Zipf-like popularity distribution, evi-
denced by a straight line on a log-log plot. Figure 6 presents the
number of views per video, on a log-log plot (ordered by rank) for
both time windows. We observe a distinctive popularity skew, but
not a straight line as one would expect from a Zipf distribution.

We make two complementary observations from Figure 6. First,
the skew towards the “head” (or popular part) of the corpus is
far less than has been previously observed in other UGC corpora.
Speciﬁcally, the top 10% of YouPorn videos receive only 65% of
the views. In comparison, the top 10% of videos generate 80% of
views on YouTube [13], and 82% of views on Vimeo [33]. Second,
the “tail” (or unpopular part) are correspondingly more popular.
Nearly 93% of YouPorn’s videos receive at least 10k views over
their lifetime when inspecting the snapshot trace. In comparison,
only 1.9% of videos on Vimeo generate more than 10k views. Fur-
ther into the “tail”, all videos in the YouPorn catalogue have at least
226 views, whereas fewer than 47% of Vimeo videos have at least
200 views.

Two explanations are possible. One possibility is that videos up-
loaded to YouPorn are generally of a higher quality than on other
UGC sites; indeed, manual inspection reveals a wealth of profes-
sionally produced content. As such, a higher quality could encour-
age users to view a more diverse body of content. A second possi-
bility is that users have a greater ﬂexibility in their content selection
requirements, i.e., users are not particularly selective in what they
choose to watch, thereby resulting in views being more evenly dis-
tributed. Our user study (Section 7) suggests that the latter may
well be true, with many users having far looser interest constraints
than traditionally understood. For example, in mainstream VoD
services, users often have relatively tight constraints on what they
wish to watch. This might be a certain programme, a serialised TV
show, or a particular genre [29]. Without these constraints, how-
ever, much larger sets of objects become acceptable for consump-
tion, leading to a lesser skew in the popularity.

That said, ﬂexibility does not explain the skew - if content selec-
tion were entirely ﬂexible, why do some objects gain more views?
One cause could be the way viewers discover content to watch.
For instance, users of other user-generated video corpora such as

YouTube may have particular videos in mind, driven by URL links
from other websites, such as social networks. It is believed that
up to 45% of requests to YouTube come from social sources [38].
Similarly, Borghol et al. [10] found that an uploader’s social net-
work (on YouTube) is one of the strongest predictors of video pop-
ularity. In contrast, users are less likely to share YouPorn links on
social networks such as Facebook, or even discuss speciﬁc videos
with friends. We conjecture that a lack of external referrals from
other websites helps create an information bottleneck that prevents
users from discovering the exact URLs corresponding to individ-
ual videos, thereby forcing most viewers to ﬁnd videos through
YouPorn’s built-in facilities (like browsing or search). When com-
bined with the inherent user ﬂexibility, this likely predisposes any
“generic” user to retrieve content from the easiest source possible,
e.g., front-page listings.

To verify the above assertions, we correlate the number of views
a video receives with the default front page browsing order. Fig-
ure 7 presents the outputs of this analysis for the 3 day trace. We
observe that the majority of views do, indeed, come from easy to
access items. On average, videos on the front page3 achieve 55k
views, compared to an average of 9k for the top 30 pages. These
can then be both contrasted with the overall average of just 603
views per video.

Our observations reﬂect well the type of behaviour one would
expect from such a content repository. With a corpus in which it
is difﬁcult to differentiate objects, it is likely that only the most
dedicated viewers (e.g., ones with special interests) would take the
effort to ﬁnd particular items of interest. More generic viewers
seek easy access content, which, of course, creates a certain level
of skew because all users are presented with the same easy access
content items. However, due to the churn of the content, these ob-
jects are quickly pushed from the front pages, thereby ﬂattening the
popularity distribution into the one shown in Figure 6.
5.2 Popularity: But now I’ve changed my mind
Next, we look at how video popularity evolves over time, driven
by regular content injection (Section 4.2) and what appears to be a
largely ﬂexible and browsing-driven user base (Section 5.1).

To gain insight into how videos accumulate views over time, we
look at the distribution of views based on a content item’s age. Fig-
ure 8 presents a log-log plot of the number of views per video,
ranked by popularity. Each curve shows the distribution of videos
with a given age (note that the tails are different due to a varying
number of videos being uploaded on those individual days). We
3This is a conservative estimate as we do not include “featured”
videos, which receive a more prominent status on the front page.

 1e-06 1e-05 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100100101102103104105106Number of Views (millions)Videos (ordered by popularity)Cumulative3 Days 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10255075100125150CDFNumber of Views (Thousands)All VideosTop 30 PagesTop 10 PagesTop Page421Figure 8: Number of views per video (log-log), for different
time windows.

Figure 9: Evolution of number of views over time (per video).

ﬁnd that videos uploaded a long time (e.g., a year) ago have not
received particularly more views than recently uploaded ones. This
is in stark contrast to prior UGC studies (e.g., [13, 37]) that show
far greater cumulative views for older videos.

To explore this, we inspect the 3 days traces to ascertain the
most popular content ages during this short period. There is a dis-
tinct preference for recently uploaded videos. Content that was
uploaded on the same day as the snapshot trace had collected on
average 28k views, in contrast to an average of only 584 views for
all other content ages. That said, we ﬁnd notable exceptions: the
content age with the third highest average number of views is 6
years, suggesting that there is no inherent reason why older con-
tent would not be suitable for viewing today. Note that browsing
options (e.g., “most viewed”) make such videos easy to ﬁnd.

To understand how the characteristics of particular videos af-
fect this rapid aging process, we inspect the daily traces, which
show how the popularity of individual videos evolve over a more
extended period of time. First, we partition videos into popular-
ity groups based on the number of views they receive during their
ﬁrst day. We then average the number of views per day received
by each video, and normalise that as a fraction of their total view
count. Figure 9 presents the results. We observe a sharp decline in
the number of views per day across all popularity groups, with the
biggest decrease occurring after the second day.

We now draw a conclusion. Continuing from the discussions in
Section 5.1, we see that the previously discussed user ﬂexibility
and browsing behaviour has a direct (and perhaps damaging) effect
on temporal trends. YouPorn displays content on its front page in
order of upload date (and then rating), thereby making more recent
content easiest to ﬁnd. Accessing content older than one day re-
quires browsing through ≈4–5 pages of listings, a process which
many users may ﬁnd cumbersome.

Only the most popular videos (> 100k views) can resist this de-
cay, with similar viewing ﬁgures being recorded on the ﬁrst and
second day.4 After the third day of their publication, however, even
extremely popular videos are likely to be pushed down by ≈10
pages, making it signiﬁcantly harder for users to discover them.
Thus, on the third day, they immediately begin to exhibit the traits
of their less popular counterparts, as their viewing ﬁgures plum-
met. Future views are then limited to users who are prepared to
more proactively seek content of interest. Relating this to tradi-
tional UGC, Crane and Sornette [18] provide a classiﬁcation of
video types (memoryless, viral, junk and quality). This would place

typical YouPorn videos into the category of junk. These are videos
that experience a short burst of activity, followed by a popularity
collapse. In comparison, such videos belong to the smallest cate-
gory of YouTube videos [18, 32].

Therefore, YouPorn videos seem to have developed temporal
properties similar to news and weather shows [6], which are highly
temporally dependent (e.g., weather forecasts from the previous
day are rarely of interest). However, contrary to news and weather
content, there is no temporal dependency in adult content — videos
created a year ago would still seem to be suitable for viewing today.
Instead, it seems that this behaviour is formed from user ﬂexibility:
many videos meet the content consumption requirements of most
users and, hence, are readily satisﬁed with the age-based listing on
the front page.
5.3 Summary

We ﬁnd that video popularity in YouPorn follows a far less skewed
distribution than traditionally understood. The reason lies in the
way users discover content, relying heavily on front page browsing.
Due to the non-interest-speciﬁc nature of this default browsing, we
conclude that most users have quite loose interest constraints, al-
lowing them to be satisﬁed by a potentially large portion of the
corpus. This results in a rapid decline in the number of page views;
most videos die out quickly as they get pushed down the brows-
ing order by newer published items. Consequently, we deduce that
the level of skew observed is actually largely an artifact of the way
content is presented to users, rather than any inherent aspect of the
video content itself.

6. CATEGORY ANALYSIS

The previous sections have looked at the corpus as a single col-
lection. However, videos within the corpus can also be listed under
one or more category pages. Although these categories do not offer
deﬁnitive information on the semantic nature of the videos, they al-
low us to inspect more targeted groups of content and their role in
helping users to discover content of interest.
6.1 Category primer

In total, 62 categories5 are available on YouPorn, spanning a
range of interests. For each video, an initial category is chosen at
upload time. Videos can also later be categorised further by other
users once the content is published. Whilst this community-driven
nature of categories means that some videos could be incorrectly

4Highly rated videos will appear at the top of the browsing list for
the previous day.

5In fact, 63 exist but one was not populated; it had only been cre-
ated a few days before the crawl and therefore we excluded it.

 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 1 10 100 1000Number of Views (millions)Videos (ordered by popularity)1 Day3 Day1 Week1 Month1 Year 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0 5 10 15 20Fraction of RequestsContent Age (Days)>100k Views<100k Views<10k Views422classiﬁed, category-speciﬁc web pages offer an additional mech-
anism by which users can browse content of a particular type; a
mechanism that many users seem to ﬁnd helpful (Section 7). We
emphasise that categories on YouPorn are not free-form tags sim-
ilar to folksonomies found on other Web 2.0 websites. In contrast
to folksonomies, user choice is restricted to the well deﬁned terms
allowed by YouPorn.

We ﬁrst inspect the number of videos in each category, shown
in Figure 10. Due to their explicit nature, the categories have been
pseudo-anonymised using their ﬁrst two letters.6 We observe a sig-
niﬁcant skew: the top 20% of genres contain 57% of the videos,
whilst the bottom 20% contains less than 2%. In fact, only 11%
of content belongs to the bottom 50%. YouPorn’s categories there-
fore consist of a much longer tail than traditionally seen in UGC
services [15], with far more categories for users to choose from.

Videos Views (bn)

Inefﬁciency Colocation

AM 58114
BL1
52814
40447
BR
35815
SH
34607
BL
33259
ST
NU
31004
27832
AN
23999
TE
21667
BI1
18348
MA
SO
17204
16240
FA
14844
FI
14093
GE
MI
13944
12959
CU
12315
LE
12097
TH
DI
10660

26.82
24.69
23.14
19.81
18.04
22.81
1.59
14.13
11.24
13.94
5.96
5.81
9.66
6.55
4.84
7.96
7.98
5.21
6.71
4.29

-0.11
-0.10
0.12
0.08
0.02
0.34
-8.97
-0.01
-0.09
0.26
-0.58
-0.52
0.16
-0.16
-0.49
0.11
0.20
-0.21
0.08
-0.27

5.69
6.37
6.79
7.44
6.67
7.10
1.00
5.65
6.61
6.57
5.74
5.63
7.64
6.83
5.44
6.74
7.46
4.67
6.07
6.33

Table 2: Category rankings ordered by number of videos. Cat-
egories appearing in other top 20 rankings (e.g.
inefﬁciency)
are not necessarily captured in this table.

Figure 10: Number of videos per category (ordered by number
of videos in the category).

process has dire consequences in terms of views for uncategorised
videos. However, categories offer insight into the interests of both
uploaders and users, as well as their relationship. In a sense, Porn
2.0 sites could be considered as a form of marketplace where up-
loaders present their videos for consumption, competing for audi-
ence views. One should therefore strive for a marketplace in which
the supply for a category exactly matches its demand. We capture
this principle through the concept of corpus efﬁciency (or, more
accurately, inefﬁciency). An efﬁcient corpus is one in which the
fraction of views for a category exactly matches the fraction of the
corpus that the category constitutes. We measure the inefﬁciency,
I, for each category as:

(cid:40) V

I =

C − 1,
if V > C.
V ) + 1, otherwise.

−( C

(1)

Figure 11: Number of views per Category (ordered by number
of videos in the category).

We also inspect the collective popularity of these various cate-
gories. Figure 11 presents the accumulated views for each cate-
gory. We observe a trend similar to Figure 10, with well populated
categories receiving many views. The most notable exception is
“NU” (videos without a category), which does extremely poorly in
relation to its size in the corpus. Whereas 17% of the corpus has
no category, these videos only collect 2% of the views. Table 2
provides an overview of the top 20 categories, ranked by size.
6.2 Efﬁciency of categories

We have seen that categories play an extremely important role in
discovering content in YouPorn, and that not participating in this
6We make mappings available online at http://www.eecs.
qmul.ac.uk/~tysong/yp/mappings.txt

where V is the fraction of views that the category receives, and
C is the fraction of the corpus that the category constitutes. As a
video can have multiple categories tagged to it, we utilise two ways
of calculating these fractions. The ﬁrst approach,7 termed inefﬁ-
ciency, attributes one view to each category that the video is part
of; consequently, a video with two categories, “BL” and “AM”, will
have one view allocated to each. Obviously, this ﬁrst approach will
also artiﬁcially inﬂate the corpus size. The second approach, which
we term weighted inefﬁciency, splits the views of a video equally
between all categories it belongs to. Speciﬁcally, the number of the
κ , where
video’s views attributed to that category are factored by 1
κ represents the number of categories a video has. In this case, the
number of videos attributed to the category are similarly factored
κ .
down by 1
For both weighted and unweighted inefﬁciency, if the value of
I is above 0, it means that a category receives a disproportion-
ately large share of the views, whilst a value below 0 indicates that
a category receives disproportionately fewer views than would be
7Unless otherwise stated, this calculation of inefﬁciency is used
throughout the rest of this section.

 0 10 20 30 40 50 60AMBL1BRSHBLSTNUANTEBI1MASOFAFIGEMICULETHDIMA1CO2ASEUCU1GRIN1FEPUPOEBHA1SWYOLABIBBCRHAKIRESH1FA1DPWESQPAVOPA1IN2ROVICOCO1GOHERIFUINBI2GA3DSO1Number of Videos (thousands) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30AMBL1BRSHBLSTNUANTEBI1MASOFAFIGEMICULETHDIMA1CO2ASEUCU1GRIN1FEPUPOEBHA1SWYOLABIBBCRHAKIRESH1FA1DPWESQPAVOPA1IN2ROVICOCO1GOHERIFUINBI2GA3DSO1Number of Views (billions)423from its proportion of the corpus. However, it is by far the most
colocated category. On average, videos categorised as “GO" are
also placed in 10.36 other categories. We ﬁnd that 4 out of the top
10 categories, ranked by the colocation level, are also in the top
10 ranked by normalised popularity. This conﬁrms our suspicion
(backed by the small-scale user study; see Section 7) that category-
based browsing is an intensively used tool.

Figure 13: Number of colocated categories (ordered by number
of videos in the category).

Figure 14: Number of views correlated with number of cate-
gories allocated to video.

To further validate the impact of colocation, Figure 14 presents
the average number of views against the number of categories a
video belongs to. We observe an almost linear trend in which
videos belonging to multiple categories get more views. On aver-
age, videos without any category receive just 51k views, compared
to 452k for those with 5 categories. We conclude that category
tags appear to be a signiﬁcant factor that contributes to views. It is
quite possible that uploaders, particularly commercial ones, might
exploit this observation. In fact, not being aware of the importance
of categories can have dire consequences for video popularity. We
observe that uncategorised videos appear in the bottom 20 most
unpopular categories ranked by absolute viewing ﬁgures (and the
least popular measured by normalised popularity).
6.4 Summary

We conclude that users in YouPorn rely heavily on category in-
formation for discovering content of interest. This appears to be
primarily driven by category-based browsing; this observation is
best highlighted by the almost linear relationship between the num-
ber of views a video receives and the number of categories it is

Figure 12: Inefﬁciency value for each category (ordered by
number of videos). For null, I = −8.96 and weighted I =
−5.51 (this is cut-off to improve readability).

expected. More generally, a value above 0 represents a category in
which “demand outweighs supply” (popular), and a value below 0
represents a category in which “supply outstrips demand” (unpop-
ular). This provides a normalised view of popularity, in contrast to
the absolute one given in Figure 11.

Figure 12 presents the inefﬁciency levels for all categories, with
both measures of inefﬁciency showing very similar trends. First,
we observe that using the absolute number of views a category
receives is somewhat misleading. The category with the highest
viewing ﬁgures (“AM”) actually receives fewer views than could
be expected from its size in the corpus (I = −0.11).
It seems
that this category collects views through its dominance in the cor-
pus, rather than through an excessive demand for the genre. This
lack of efﬁciency is observable in all other categories too — sev-
eral unexpected genres have a disproportionately large number of
views, whereas other genres have too many videos and too few
views. 27 categories have a disproportionately large number of
videos in comparison to the views received (I < 0), whereas 35
categories are disproportionately popular compared to their size in
the corpus (I > 0).8 No categories were found to be truly market
efﬁcient with “BL” coming closest at 0.016, alongside 14 others
that fall between -0.1 and 0.1.
6.3 Category Colocation

The previous subsection has shown that there are some notable
market inefﬁciencies in YouPorn’s corpus. These inefﬁciencies
could offer a signiﬁcant opportunity for uploaders. For example,
theorists believe that users constantly seek out new forms of visual
stimulation [31]. Therefore, some less populated categories would
be suitable for targeted content injections as their demand outstrips
supply.

However, the ability to allocate a video to multiple categories
(i.e., category colocation), could undermine the independence of
the samples — a video in multiple categories will be far more visi-
ble through category-based browsing. To investigate this, Figure 13
re-plots Figure 12 whilst also presenting the average number of
colocations for each category. For example, Figure 13 shows that
“MA1" is, on average, tagged in a video alongside 6 other cate-
gories. We observe a strong correlation between inefﬁciency9 and
colocation, with a correlation coefﬁcient of 0.66. For instance, the
“GO" category gets 3 times as many views as could be expected
8Interestingly, many of the more unusual niche categories (e.g.
“GO”, “IN2”, “FA1”) fall in this area.
9Note, inefﬁciency also offers a measure of normalised popularity.

-4-3-2-1 0 1 2 3 4AMBL1BRSHBLSTNUANTEBI1MASOFAFIGEMICULETHDIMA1CO2ASEUCU1GRIN1FEPUPOEBHA1SWYOLABIBBCRHAKIRESH1FA1DPWESQPAVOPA1IN2ROVICOCO1GOHERIFUINBI2GA3DSO1InefficiencyInefficiencyWeighted Inefficiency 0 5 10 15AMBL1BRSHBLSTNUANTEBI1MASOFAFIGEMICULETHDIMA1CO2ASEUCU1GRIN1FEPUPOEBHA1SWYOLABIBBCRHAKIRESH1FA1DPWESQPAVOPA1IN2ROVICOCO1GOHERIFUINBI2GA3DSO1-3-2-1 0 1 2 3Number of Colocated CategoriesInefficiency 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 2 4 6 8 10 12Average Views (100k)Number of Categories424listed in. Obviously, this raises questions about exactly how inher-
ently important categories are, as the tagging of a video in as many
as 10 categories suggests a low level of accuracy in many cases.
Instead, it seems probable that many users use categories as a very
coarse way of targeting interest groups. Once again, this suggests
a level of ﬂexibility that is far less prevalent in traditional media
types. We also ﬁnd that this information is not being exploited well
in YouPorn, with a poor level of market efﬁciency being shown in
the corpus (i.e., often uploaders do not target their content well).

7. ELASTICITY IN CONTENT CONSUMP-

TION

Our results have highlighted a number of characteristics that might
be collectively taken as implying that users do not visit YouPorn
with speciﬁc videos in mind: duration does not matter (Figure 1);
users tend to simply go for the most easily accessible videos (Fig-
ure 7); the number of views depends largely on the video being
listed on the front page (Figure 9); and the number of views is
correlated with the number of categories a video is listed in (Fig-
ure 14). These observations lead us to hypothesise that a signiﬁcant
portion of users are therefore quite ﬂexible in what they watch.

To conﬁrm this apparent elasticity in users’ content consump-
tion requirements (and to verify other ﬁndings), we performed a
small-scale user study, recruiting 46 respondents over social net-
works and mailing lists. Consistent with our expectations, we ﬁnd
that 85% of users ﬁnd it easy or just slightly difﬁcult to ﬁnd content
of interest, with 15% saying they found it difﬁcult. 43% of survey
respondents also said that over 3/5 of the videos they found match
their interests.

We believe that this type of ﬂexibility sheds light on some of the
results obtained in the previous sections. Conﬁrming our earlier
suspicions, the survey shows that the observed ﬁndings do, indeed,
seem to arise from users’ dependencies on the order in which con-
tent is displayed on the default front page, and on category-speciﬁc
pages: when asked what characteristics they use to ﬁnd content
(multiple answers were allowed), we found that only 22% of users
ever visit the site with a pre-determined video in mind. Instead, a
large share of the respondents appear to utilise what we have pre-
viously termed “ﬂexible” ways to discover content: 63% rely on
browsing the front page, 59% use category-based browsing, and
50% utilise the search functionality. Further, in-line with our ear-
lier conjecture, we found that only 9% visit YouPorn through links
from other sites. This is unlike the behavior of YouTube users, for
instance, who rely more on web search engines [19] and external
links [38], rather than browsing.
It is also unlike other types of
repositories, where users primarily visit to watch speciﬁc videos
(e.g., sports games [11]).

When combining the above ﬁndings, it becomes likely that the
more ﬂexible users could all be satisﬁed with a relatively small set
of videos taken from a large range of acceptable ones. We argue
that this ﬂexibility should therefore be leveraged by the content
distribution infrastructure. Speciﬁcally, where many videos could
satisfy the user, we posit that the content distribution infrastructure
should guide users towards those particular ones that also have a
low network cost (e.g., available nearby). This could improve user
quality of experience and reduce network overhead, which beneﬁts
other users as well as ISPs. Considering users’ predisposition to-
wards browsing the front page, this could be done easily: instead of
ordering videos by recency of upload (a common design pattern),
the different browsing pages generated by the web front-end could
also take into account which videos are available near to the viewer.

Most simply, nearby videos that match a user’s interests could be
placed at the top of the front page.

Our user survey indicates that only a small amount of shared
content would be required: 87% of users watch under 10 videos a
session, while 43% watch 3 or less. Assuming a large intersection
between these ﬂexible users’ interests, a relatively small amount of
(generic) content would likely satisfy the demands of many view-
ers. This suggests the approach would be highly feasible in this
domain. However, it must be ensured that optimising the delivery
infrastructure is not done at the expense of a user’s quality of ex-
perience. A key challenge here would be to ensure that this small
amount of content is kept sufﬁciently “fresh”. Only 24% of our sur-
vey respondents stated that they do not get bored easily and would
watch a video multiple times. Thus, it is important that users are
given sufﬁcient choice to ensure that they are provided with novel
items they would wish to watch.

8. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

This paper presented the ﬁrst detailed measurement study of In-
ternet adult media distribution, focussing on the YouPorn website.
Three key aspects of this system have been inspected: the corpus,
the nature of content popularity and the impact of categories. We
found that YouPorn is a hugely popular service with over 60 bil-
lion views recorded from a corpus of 183k videos. Unlike tradi-
tional UGC websites, there is an extremely prominent commercial
element to its content, as well as a seemingly well managed vet-
ting procedure. We observed a number of other interesting prop-
erties, particularly relating to the rapid decay of content popularity
as measured from the number of views, as well as users’ depen-
dency on category metadata to ﬁnd content that matches their inter-
ests. Further investigation uncovered the main reason behind these
observations: the predominant use of YouPorn’s browsing options.
Particularly, this is driven by the apparent ﬂexibility that most users
have when accessing adult media: they do not seek a speciﬁc video,
rather, they search for any video that falls with certain (broad) in-
terest constraints. We posit that this is a characteristic that likely
exists more generally in other multimedia repositories, but to vary-
ing extents. We therefore propose to exploit this observation by
shaping users’ browsing behaviour towards videos with a low net-
work cost. In fact, this could be done with the intention of optimis-
ing any metric. The constantly expanding size and popularity of
these repositories means that this is an approach that may become
increasingly necessary to scale content delivery.

Due to its infancy, there is a signiﬁcant amount of future work
that could focus on adult video streaming. The dataset presented in
this paper has focussed on aggregated system-level and video-level
information. Whereas this offers insights into various corpus and
popularity aspects, it does not provide user-level analysis. The next
stage of our work will therefore focus on this type of data to under-
stand exactly how individual users interact with such websites. This
will capture their behaviour (e.g., skipping), as well as things like
regional differences between user groups. Although not explored in
this paper, our survey indicates that these elements are potentially
quite different from traditional media. Such data will also allow
us to gain a better understanding of things like trafﬁc volumes and
cacheability. We also intend to further develop the ideas explored in
Section 7. Through user-level data, for example, we will be able to
understand the current intersection of user interests and requests.
More extensive user testing will also complement this. Beyond
these targeted avenues of study, there are more general topics of in-
terest, including social networking aspects and deeper analysis of
the “2.0” elements of these services (e.g., ratings, comments, and
recommendations).

4259. REFERENCES
[1] Alexa. http://www.alexa.com/.
[2] Youporn. http://www.youporn.com.
[3] Youporn.com is now a 100% redis site.

https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/redis-
db/d4QcWV0p-YM.

[4] Youtube statistics.

http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/en-GB/statistics.html.

[5] Cisco visual networking index: Forecast and methodology,

2011-2016, 2012.

[6] ABRAHAMSSON, H., AND NORDMARK, M. Program

popularity and viewer behaviour in a large TV-on-demand
system. In Proc. ACM IMC (2012).

[7] ANTHONY, S. Just how big are porn sites?

http://www.extremetech.com/computing/123929-just-how-
big-are-porn-sites.

[8] APOSTOLOPOULOS, J. G., TAN, W.-T., AND WEE, S. J.
Video streaming: Concepts, algorithms, and systems. HP
Laboratories, report HPL-2002-260 (2002).

[9] ATTWOOD, F. Porn.com: Making sense of online

pornography, vol. 48. Peter Lang, 2010.

[10] BORGHOL, Y., ARDON, S., CARLSSON, N., EAGER, D.,

AND MAHANTI, A. The untold story of the clones:
Content-agnostic factors that impact YouTube video
popularity. In Proc. of ACM SIGKDD (2012).

[11] BRAMPTON, A., MACQUIRE, A., FRY, M., RAI, I. A.,

RACE, N. J., AND MATHY, L. Characterising and exploiting
workloads of highly interactive video-on-demand.
Multimedia systems 15, 1 (2009), 3–17.

[12] CARROLL, J. S., PADILLA-WALKER, L. M., NELSON,

L. J., OLSON, C. D., BARRY, C. M., AND MADSEN, S. D.
Generation XXX: Pornography acceptance and use among
emerging adults. Journal of adolescent research 23, 1
(2008), 6–30.

[13] CHA, M., KWAK, H., RODRIGUEZ, P., AHN, Y.-Y., AND

MOON, S. Analyzing the Video Popularity Characteristics of
Large-scale User Generated Content Systems. IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw. 17, 5 (2009), 1357–1370.

[14] CHA, M., RODRIGUEZ, P., CROWCROFT, J., MOON, S.,

AND AMATRIAIN, X. Watching television over an IP
network. In Proc. ACM IMC (2008).

[15] CHENG, X., DALE, C., AND LIU, J. Statistics and social

network of YouTube videos. In Proc. IEEE IWQoS (2008).

[16] COOPER, A. Sexuality and the internet: Surﬁng into the new

millennium. CyberPsychology & Behavior 1, 2 (1998),
187–193.

[17] COOPERSMITH, J. Does your mother know what you really

do? The changing nature and image of computer-based
pornography. History and Technology 22, 1 (2006), 1–25.
[18] CRANE, R., AND SORNETTE, D. Robust dynamic classes

revealed by measuring the response function of a social
system. Proceedings of The National Academy of Sciences
105, 41 (2008), 15649–15653.

[19] CUNNINGHAM, S. J., AND NICHOLS, D. M. How people

ﬁnd videos. In Proc. ACM/IEEE JCDL (2008).

[20] DANEBACK, K., SEVCIKOVA, A., MÅNSSON, S.-A., AND

ROSS, M. W. Outcomes of using the internet for sexual
purposes: Fulﬁlment of sexual desires. Sexual Health 10
(2012), 26–31.

[21] DINES, G. Pornland: How Porn Has Hijacked Our

Sexuality. Beacon Press, 2010.

[22] GAO, P., LIU, T., CHEN, Y., WU, X., ELKHATIB, Y., AND

EDWARDS, C. The measurement and modeling of a P2P
streaming video service. In GridNets (2008).

[23] GUO, L., TAN, E., CHEN, S., XIAO, Z., AND ZHANG, X.

The stretched exponential distribution of internet media
access patterns. In Proc. ACM PODC (2008).

[24] HEI, X., LIANG, C., LIANG, J., LIU, Y., AND ROSS,
K. W. A measurement study of a large-scale P2P IPTV
system. IEEE Trans. Multimedia 9, 8 (2007), 1672–1687.
[25] HU, W., WU, O., CHEN, Z., FU, Z., AND MAYBANK, S.
Recognition of pornographic web pages by classifying texts
and images. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 29, 6 (2007), 1019–1034.

[26] HURLEY, R., PRUSTY, S., SOROUSH, H., WALLS, R. J.,

ALBRECHT, J., CECCHET, E., LEVINE, B. N.,
LIBERATORE, M., LYNN, B., AND WOLAK, J.
Measurement and analysis of child pornography trafﬁcking
on P2P networks. In Proc. WWW (2013).

[27] LABOVITZ, C., LEKEL-JOHNSON, S., MCPHERSON, D.,
OBERHEIDE, J., AND JAHANIAN, F. Internet inter-domain
trafﬁc. In Proc. SIGCOMM (2010).

[28] MEHTA, M. D., AND PLAZA, D. Content analysis of

pornographic images available on the internet. The
Information Society 13, 2 (1997), 153–161.

[29] NENCIONI, G., SASTRY, N., CHANDARIA, J., AND

CROWCROFT, J. Understanding and decreasing the network
footprint of over-the-top on-demand delivery of TV content.
In Proc. WWW (2013).

[30] OGAS, O., AND GADDAM, S. A billion wicked thoughts:
what the world’s largest experiment reveals about human
desire. Dutton, 2011.

[31] PAASONEN, S. Carnal Resonance: Affect and Online

Pornography. MIT Press, 2011.

[32] PINTO, H., ALMEIDA, J. M., AND GONÇALVES, M. A.

Using early view patterns to predict the popularity of
YouTube videos. In Proc. ACM WSDM (2013).

[33] SASTRY, N. How to tell head from tail in user-generated

content corpora. In Proc. ICWSM (2012).

[34] SCHUHMACHER, M., ZIRN, C., AND VÖLKER, J.

Exploring YouPorn categories, tags, and nicknames for
pleasant recommendations. In Proc. SEXI (2013).

[35] SCHULZE, H., AND MOCHALSKI, K. Internet study

2007-2009. ipoque Report, 2009.

[36] SULER, J. The online disinhibition effect. Cyberpsychology

& Behavior 7, 3 (2004), 321–326.

[37] SZABO, G., AND HUBERMAN, B. A. Predicting the

popularity of online content. CACM 53, 8 (2010), 80–88.

[38] WATTENHOFER, M., INTERIAN, Y., VAVER, J., AND

BROXTON, T. Catching a viral video. In Proc. Workshop on
Social Interaction Analysis and Service Providers (2010).
[39] WONDRACEK, G., HOLZ, T., PLATZER, C., KIRDA, E.,

AND KRUEGEL, C. Is the internet for porn? An insight into
the online adult industry. In Proc. Workshop on Economics of
Information Security (2010).

[40] YU, H., ZHENG, D., ZHAO, B. Y., AND ZHENG, W.

Understanding user behavior in large-scale video-on-demand
systems. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review 40, 4
(2006), 333–344.

[41] ZINK, M., SUH, K., GU, Y., AND KUROSE, J.

Characteristics of youtube network trafﬁc at a campus
network–measurements, models, and implications. Computer
Networks 53, 4 (2009), 501–514.

426