Crime Scene Investigation: SMS Spam Data Analysis

Ilona Murynets

AT&T Security Research Center

New York, NY

ilona@att.com

Roger Piqueras Jover

AT&T Security Research Center

New York, NY

roger.jover@att.com

ABSTRACT
The Short Messaging Service (SMS), one of the most suc-
cessful cellular services, generates millions of dollars in rev-
enue for mobile operators. Estimates indicate that billions
of text messages are traveling the airwaves daily. Never-
theless, text messaging is becoming a source of customer
dissatisfaction due to the rapid surge of messaging abuse
activities. Although spam is a well tackled problem in the
email world, SMS spam experiences a yearly growth larger
than 500%.
In this paper we present, to the best of our
knowledge, the ﬁrst analysis of SMS spam traﬃc from a
tier-1 cellular operator. Communication patterns of spam-
mers are compared to those of legitimate cell-phone users
and Machine to Machine (M2M) connected appliances. The
results indicate that M2M systems exhibit communication
proﬁles similar to spammers, which could mislead spam ﬁl-
ters. Beyond the expected results, such as a large load of
text messages sent out to a wide target list, other interest-
ing ﬁndings are made. For example, the results indicate that
the great majority of the spammers connect to the network
with just a handful of diﬀerent hardware models. We ﬁnd
the main geographical sources of messaging abuse in the US.
We also ﬁnd evidence of spammer mobility, voice and data
traﬃc resembling the behavior of legitimate customers.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.6.5 [Security and Protection]; K.4.1 [Computers and
Society]: Public Policy Issues—Abuse and crime involv-
ing computers; C.2.3 [Computer Communications Net-
works]: Network Operations—Network Monitoring

General Terms
Experimentation, Measurement

Keywords
SMS, abuse, spam, traﬃc analysis, cellular networks

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
IMC’12, November 14–16, 2012, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1705-4/12/11 ...$15.00.

1.

INTRODUCTION

For the past three decades, the Short Messaging Service
(SMS) has gained tremendous popularity throughout the
world. Reports estimate billions of text messages handled
daily by cellular providers’ messaging infrastructures [19],
generating millions of dollars of yearly revenue [7].

Being unquestionably successful,

text messaging is
steadily becoming an annoyance due to the surge of SMS
fraudulent activities [16]. Spam is the commonly adopted
name to refer to unwanted messages that are massively sent
to a large number of recipients.

Spam is a well known and tackled problem in the con-
text of e-mail. Multiple solutions detect and block spam
e-mails daily resulting in a small amount of spam reaching
customer’s inboxes. This is considered a great achievement
given the estimates indicating that 90% of the daily elec-
tronic mail traversing the Internet is spam [3].

In the case of text messaging abuse, the trend has been
rapidly increasing with the introduction of unlimited mes-
saging plans. Current studies estimate mobile SMS spam to
be experiencing a steady yearly growth larger than 500% [8].
Eﬀective anti-abuse messaging ﬁlters are deployed, sparing
networks from spam text messages injected into cellular net-
works from the Internet. However, content-based algorithms
used to detect e-mail spam, are less eﬃcient in the case of
SMS spam [11]. The length of an SMS is limited to only 160
characters [23] and customers often use acronyms, pruned
spellings and emoticons which mislead detection algorithms.
Thus, mobile originated SMS spam still remains a problem
for cellular networks.

The criminals - spammers - connect aircards and cell-
phones to personal computers (PCs). These are used to
send thousands of daily spam text messages, mostly using
pre-paid SIM (Subscriber Identity Module) cards with un-
limited messaging plans. The defense against such illegiti-
mate activities often involves SIM shutdowns and account
cancelations. This does not stop most spammers, though,
who purchase multiple cards and swap them to limit the
daily per-SIM volume [8].

Millions of illegitimate text messages are transmitted via
cellular networks daily [16]. These messages consume net-
work resources that could be allocated to legitimate ser-
vices otherwise. SMS spam results also in a major inconve-
nience for cellular customers because, without an unlimited
plan, the end user is paying at a per received message basis.
Therefore, SMS spam potentially generates unwanted bill
charges for some users leading to negative messaging experi-
ence and customer dissatisfaction. Spam also exposes smart-

441Field
Time
Originating number
Terminating number
Call type
Duration
Load
IMEI
LAC-CID
Lat-Long
Account age
Customer segment

Description

Data Type
SMS/Voice/Data Transmission/Reception date and time
SMS/Voice
SMS/ Voice
SMS/Voice
Voice
Data
SMS/Voice/Data
SMS/Voice
SMS/Voice
SMS/Voice/Data Time since contract activation
SMS/Voice/Data Prepaid/Postpaid

Originating number
Terminating number
Mobile originated/terminated SMS/call
Phone call time duration
IP traﬃc byte cound
International Mobile Equipment Identity
Location Area Code and Cell ID
Base Station Coordinates

Table 1: SMS/Voice/Data Call Detail Record ﬁelds

phone users to viruses. Often multiple fraudulent messaging
activities such as phishing, identity theft and fraud [25] are
related to SMS spam. SMS is also known as an entry vector
for malware propagation [15].

In this paper we analyze the characteristics and commu-
nication patterns of SMS spammers. The analysis is based
on mining SMS, Voice and IP network traﬃc from a tier-1
network operator in the United States. The behavior of over
9000 positively identiﬁed and known spammers is analyzed
and compared to legitimate cell-phone users and embedded
Machine to Machine (M2M) appliances. As will be shown
throughout the paper, some M2M communication systems
exhibit a behavior that resembles in some aspects that of an
SMS spammer. The results of this investigation are being
used to develop an advanced SMS spam detection engine,
the details of which are out of the scope of this paper.

Beyond the expected results, such as the large load of
messages sent by spammers to a widely geographically dis-
tributed target list, very interesting discoveries are presented
in this paper. For example, the vast majority of spammers
utilize just ﬁve diﬀerent models of hardware to send the mes-
sages. Some of these devices are very popular feature phones
that are reﬂashed to be used as cellular modem. In terms of
traﬃc, spammers make a large number of phone calls, of very
short duration, perhaps to mislead detection schemes that
might discard accounts with a near-human voice communi-
cation proﬁle. We also ﬁnd the main geographical hot-spots
(sources) of messaging abuse activities in the US and that
some spammers launch very geographically targeted cam-
paigns.

To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to

(a) analyze characteristics of fraudulent SMS spam traﬃc

over a major cellular network

(b) analyze voice and IP communication patterns and device
and location characteristics of accounts cancelled due to
fraudulent SMS activities

(c) compare communication patterns of spammers, legiti-

mate cell-phone users and M2M systems.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
describes the three data sets under analysis (SMS spam-
mers, legitimate users and M2M systems) and how they are
labeled. Section 3 presents the data analysis. In Section
4 we give some introductory comments on an SMS spam
detection engine that has been designed based on the data

analysis in this paper. Section 5 discusses the related work.
Finally, the study is concluded with the closing remarks in
Section 6.

‘

2. EVIDENCE OF THE CRIME: DATA SET
The analysis presented in this paper is based on traﬃc
data provided by a tier-1 cellular operator in the United
States. The data sample contains Call Detail Records
(CDR) of 9000 spammer accounts and almost 17000 legiti-
mate accounts. This last set includes about 7000 Machine
to Machine devices and 10000 post-paid family plans, from
the one year period between March 2011 and February 2012.
CDRs are records logging each phone call, text message
and data exchange in the network. If two communicating
ends belong to the same provider, a duple of records is
stored. The Mobile Originated (MO) record logs data of the
transmitting party, while the Mobile Terminated (MT) one
stores information of the receiver. Note that the MO and
the MT records for the same transaction contain duplicated
data, such as the originating number and the terminating
number. IP (Internet Protocol) data traﬃc generates only
MO logs.

Table 1 summarizes the CDR ﬁelds used in our analysis.
The originating and terminating phone numbers are fully
anonymized and only the ﬁrst 8 digits of the International
Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) are parsed, discarding
individual serial numbers. This ﬁrst portion of the device
identiﬁer, known as the Type Allocation Code (TAC), de-
termines the manufacturer and model of the wireless device.
In the case of a phone, the TAC indicates the manufacturer
and model of the phone itself (e.g. Nokia Lumia 900) and,
in the case of an M2M connected device, the TAC identiﬁes
the embedded cellular modem (e.g. Sierra Wireless Q2687).
The spammer data set is obtained as follows. A list of pos-
itively identiﬁed spamming accounts and their cancelation
dates were provided by the Fraud Department of the cellu-
lar operator. The Fraud Department maintains a constantly
updated white-list of known legitimate sources of large loads
of text messages (i.e. Twitter, American Idol alerts, etc) so
they are never confused with spam. Therefore, this data set
contains exclusively spammer accounts that were identiﬁed
and disconnected from the network.

The legitimate account data set is obtained in two steps.
First legitimate user accounts are selected and then legit-
imate M2M appliances are catalogued and included to the
set. Our analysis of spammer accounts revealed that 99:64%

442(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 1: Messaging pattern of spammers (red), legitimate customers (green) and M2M (blue)

of spammers have prepaid plans. Therefore, the set of legiti-
mate customers is drawn from a random and geographically
uniform sample of post-paid family plan accounts, which are
highly unlikely to be used by a spammer. This way we min-
imize the probability of having an unknown spammer misla-
beled as legitimate. In parallel, M2M connected appliances
are identiﬁed by the TAC and extracted from the operator’s
list of M2M approved devices. This is a database of the
M2M devices that have been selected, tested and approved
to operate on the provider’s cellular network. These devices
include connected appliances running all kinds of services.
Some applications found in our data set are asset tracking,
remote medical monitoring, security monitoring, Automatic
Teller Machines and smart grid power meters. We discard,
though, approved M2M systems with a Universal Serial Bus
(USB) port because these could be used to send illegitimate
messages if plugged to a spammer’s computer.

Message abusing accounts stay alive for a short period of
time (see Section 3.1), therefore we collected CDR records
for spammer accounts for one week prior to cancelation. For
each legitimate account we collected data for a random week
between March 2011 and February 2012.

From the CDR data ﬁelds we extract multiple features
that characterize customer communication patterns. For
example, based on the time stamp of each MO SMS (and
MO call) we calculate the intervals between two consecutive

outgoing messages (and phone calls) and the number of out-
going messages (calls) per day. Based on the time stamps
of MT SMSs (MT calls) we calculate the average number
of MT messages (calls) per day. The response ratio is com-
puted combining the average number of MO and MT mes-
sages (calls) per day. The terminating number ﬁeld for SMS
and voice traﬃc, also anonymized, is used to calculate the
number of individual recipients and the number of diﬀerent
terminating area codes per day. From uplink and downlink
byte counts we compute aggregated data usage per week.

Finally, geo-location data is extracted from the CDR
records. The coordinates of the serving base station are
recorded each time an SMS is transmitted. MO records con-
tain the coordinates of the tower receiving the message in
the uplink, whereas the MT record lists the base station de-
livering the SMS in the downlink. Based on this data ﬁelds,
the location of a device can be estimated with an accuracy
equivalent to the size of a cell or sector. If two communi-
cating devices are connected to the same operator, we know
approximate locations of both the sender and the receiver.

3.

INVESTIGATION

This section describes the analysis of conﬁrmed SMS
spammer accounts that were canceled due to messaging
abuse activities. The study compares communication pat-

443recipient into replying to the message (Figure 2). Despite
a small percentage of users will reply, the large amount of
accounts targeted in a spam campaign results in many re-
sponses.

Figure 1c, which plots the distribution of the number of
destinations, shows that legitimate accounts have a small set
of recipients. Cell-phone users text on average to 7 contacts
per day, while spammers hit a couple of thousand victims
each day.

The ratio of the number of recipients to the number of
messages, shown in Figure 1d, provides an additional in-
sight. On average, spammers send one message to each vic-
tim. Legitimate users send multiple messages to a small set
of destinations. For this speciﬁc feature, M2M appliances
display a mixed distribution. Some devices send many mes-
sages to a small set of destinations while others transmit one
single message to each destination. It is important to note
that such M2M systems could be miss-labeled as message
abusers by simple spam ﬁlters.

3.2.1 Response ratio
In subsection we investigate the ratio between the num-
ber of received and transmitted messages (response ratio).
Although spammers receive a lot of messages, the response
ratio is very diﬀerent to that of a legitimate user. Figure
3 plots an example for a randomly selected spammer and
legitimate user (with a post-paid family plan). The number
of messages is equally normalized in both cases.

In the case of legitimate users, generally messages are sent
in response to a previous message in a sequential way. There-
fore, the response ratio close to 1. For spammers the amount
of MT SMSs is proportionally very small to the number of
transmitted messages. Therefore, the response ratio is close
to 0.

3.2.2 Message timing and time series
This sub-section investigates timing characteristics of
spam text messages. Due to the large load of SMSs spam-
mers send, the intervals between two consecutive messages
are short. On the other hand, both legitimate customers
and M2M systems send messages less frequently. This can
be observed in Figure 4a, which shows the distribution of
the intervals between two sequential messages.

Figure 4b plots the distribution of the inter-message time
entropy. Usually, spammers send messages at a constant
rate using a computer. Legitimate users are less predictable.
One cannot accurately estimate when the next text message
will be sent given the time of the previous one. Inter-SMS
intervals for spammers are less random resulting in low en-
tropy values. On the other hand, intervals between two le-
gitimate messages are random, with higher entropy.

Messaging activities of certain M2M devices are pre-
scheduled. For example, smart grid meters report mea-
surements periodically. Other applications, such as park-
ing meters and ATMs, have communications initiated by
humans. A message is sent each time a parking receipt is
issued. Therefore, we observe a large number of M2M con-
nected devices with a low value of the entropy, overlapping
with spammers, and some with a higher value of the entropy,
overlapping with legitimate users.

Beyond the large messaging load at a high frequency, we
investigate what strategy spammers follow to transmit text
messages over time. Figure 5 plots a typical example of the

Figure 2: SMS spam message requesting a reply

terns of spammers to those of legitimate customers, both
cell-phone users and M2M devices.

In all the ﬁgures throughout the paper, legitimate cell-
phone users, M2M systems and spammers are represented
in green, blue and red, respectively.

This section is organized in ﬁve subsections. We start
with Subsection 3.1, which brieﬂy describes the character-
istics of the accounts of message abusers. Subsection 3.2
investigates the SMS spam traﬃc in general and Subsection
3.3 studies the location information of both spammers and
their targets. Finally, Subsection 3.4 discusses tools used in
messaging abuse and voice and data traﬃc are described in
Subsection 3.5.
3.1 Spammer sketch: Account information

Detailed analysis of Call Detail Records indicates that
the great majority of spammers (99.64%) are using pre-paid
accounts. As the GSMA Messaging Anti-Abuse Working
Group investigated [8], spammers purchase bulk SIM cards
with unlimited messaging plans. These SIM cards are con-
stantly switched to circumvent detection schemes and reduce
the number of messages sent per day. Also they discard them
once an account is canceled and continue spamming with a
new one.

The average age of an illegitimate account is 7 to 11 days.
This indicates that message abuse accounts are canceled
rapidly on average. The account age of a legitimate user
is often several months to a couple years.
3.2 The Crime: Messaging Abuse

Figures 1a and 1b compare the empirical histograms for
the number of text messages sent and received by legitimate
accounts, M2M and spammers. Intuitively, spammers gen-
erate a large load of messages. The number of spam SMSs
is two orders of magnitude higher than that of legitimate
user text messages and one order of magnitude above the
number of messages from networked appliances.

Spammers not only send but also receive two orders of
magnitude more messages than legitimate customers do. Al-
though this behavior is, at ﬁrst, unexpected, it can be ex-
plained by the nature of SMS spam messages. Upon recep-
tion of an unrequested text message, users sometimes at-
tempt to reply to opt-out from the advertised service. Fur-
thermore, actual spam messages often attempt to trick the

444Figure 3: Example of normalized response ratio for a legitimate cell-phone user (green) and a spammer (red)

number of messages per minute sent over the span of one day.
The results indicate that spammers focus the illegitimate
activity during the day time. This might be to minimize
the annoyance caused to recipients and lower the chances
to be reported to spam detections services such as the 7726
service [1].
3.2.3 Message content
The analysis of the content of spam messages is out of the
scope of this paper. However, we oﬀer a brief glimpse of some
of our ﬁndings. Querying the Cloudmark 7726 data-base of
user reported spam messages [1], we access the content of
the messages sent by positively identiﬁed spammers. Based
on this data we determine that spammers based in far apart
locations sometimes ﬂood messages with exactly the same
content. This could be an indication of either collaboration
or a set of common sources both for revenue and content.
3.3 The Scene of the Crime

The next step of our analysis is to determine the geo-
graphical distribution of messaging abuse. We aim to ﬁnd
out where spammers base their activities and where the tar-
gets of such SMS traﬃc are located. Finally, we attempt to
determine whether spammers are mobile or not.
3.3.1 Location of spammers and their targets
Figure 6 shows the locations of accounts identiﬁed for
messaging abuse activities during the one year period under
analysis. Data indicates that spammers are mainly located
in California, speciﬁcally in the counties of Sacramento and
Orange and in the surroundings of Los Angeles. Other no-
table sources of spam are observed in the New York/New
Jersey/Long Island areas and in Miami Beach. Smaller
sources of messaging abuse are found in Illinois, Michigan,
North Carolina and Texas. Note that this does not im-

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Distributions of the average inter-SMS
time and its entropy for spammers (red), legitimate
customers (green) and M2M (blue)

1.10.100.1000.10000.100000.0.00.10.20.30.40.5AverageinterSMStimeinsecondsDensity0123450.000.020.040.060.08EntropyofinterSMStimeDensity445Figure 5: The number of messages sent per minute by a typical randomly selected spammer

Figure 6: Location of SMS spammers.

ply that spam will always come from only these areas, but
gives an indication of the non-uniform origin of SMS spam
messages. Messaging abuse in the SMS world appears to
originate from a few locations over the US.

Figures 7a and 7b show the recipients of SMS messages
sent out in one day by a randomly selected spammer and
legitimate customer respectively. Each map plots the source
(spammer or legitimate user) with a pin and individual re-
cipients with a diamond. Note that we only have location

information for customers (recipients) subscribed to the cel-
lular operator under analysis. The legitimate customer com-
municates only with a small number of contacts. Most of the
recipients for the given user belong to the local area (i.e. the
area around the subscriber’s home) as well as several other
locations (e.g. areas where the subscriber works, used to
live or where friends and relatives reside). In contrast, the
recipients of spam text messages appear to be distributed

00:0003:0006:0009:0012:0015:0018:0021:0000:00TimePacificTimeMOSMSperminute446sages and the number of recipients. The linear relation in
the case of SMS spammers is obvious. Both M2M systems
and cell-phone users cluster around the bottom-left area of
the graph. One can notice in the ﬁgure some M2M appli-
ances sending up to 20000 messages to 1 single destination.
This is a common situation in, for example, security or mon-
itoring M2M applications in which reports are timely sent
to a controlling server.

The relation between the ratio (number of message recip-
ients)/(number of messages sent) and the average number
of area codes reached by day is plotted in Figure 8d. Cell-
phone users congregate at the bottom left of the Figure,
with low destinations-to-messages ratio and a small set of
contacted area codes. A great majority of spammers exhibit
the opposite behavior, clustering on the top-right corner of
the ﬁgure. Nevertheless, a substantial number of spammers
with a diﬀerent behavior is identiﬁed.

The spammers aggregated on the bottom-right corner of
Figure 8d are message abusers that target very speciﬁc ge-
ographical regions. These accounts still send thousands of
messages per day with a ratio close to one destination per
message. However, the number of targeted area codes is in
the range of the number of recipients from legitimate cell-
phone users.

3.3.2 Do spammers move? Yes, they do!
In terms of mobility, one expects spammers to not move.
Therefore, all messages should be handled by one single base
station. Figure 9 plots the distribution of the number of base
stations (Location Area Code - Cell ID, LACCI) a device
is connected to in one day. Legitimate customers display
a highly mobile behavior, with most of the users visiting at
most 30 cells sectors. This number depends on many factors,
such as the length of the daily commute. The distribution
exhibits a long tail with a minority of highly mobile cell-
phone users.

Spammers, as expected, are much less mobile. They
still appear to traverse an average of about 4 cells or sec-
tors. This might be due to the following reasons. On one
hand, spammers might mount their equipment on a vehicle
and drive around the area in an attempt to misguide de-
tection schemes looking at device mobility. On the other
hand, especially in the case of aircards, the hardware often
connects to the network by means of a Third Generation
(3G) technology. 3G wireless networks in the operator un-
der study are based on Wideband Code Multiple Division
Access (WCDMA). In such technology, the receiver can be
physically connected to up to 6 sectors at the same time,
combining the signal at the RAKE receiver [22]. Depending
on the channel conditions and fading, the serving base sta-
tion might ﬂuctuate throughout this list of 6 LACCIs. This
would result in CDR records from the same static device
appearing to come from up to 6 diﬀerent sectors.

Note that, though, based on the IMEI, we are able to de-
termine the actual hardware used by the spammer to send
messages. In the case of GSM devices, a cell-phone or cel-
lular modem is at all time connected to, at most, one cell
tower [6]. Camping on base stations miles away from each
other deﬁnitively indicates movement.

The distribution of recipients’ area codes for M2M is
mixed. The majority of appliances are quasi-static, with
most of their messaging load being handled by a couple of
sectors. This corresponds to non-mobility M2M applications

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Example area code messaging pattern for
a spammer (a) and a legitimate customers (b)

uniformly over the US population (the spammer sends mes-
sages to most area codes).

Figure 8a plots the distribution of the number of unique
area codes contacted in one day by spammers, legitimate
customers and M2M systems. Spammers are character-
ized by messaging a large number of area codes, always
greater than those of cell-phone users and M2M. We ob-
serve, though, a small amount of spammers contacting a
reduced number of area codes. Most M2M devices contact
numbers just within one area code.

Independent of the number of unique area codes, it is in-
teresting to know how often these area codes are contacted.
Figure 8b plots the entropy of these area codes. In this con-
text, entropy stands for the randomness of the connections
in one day. A low value of the entropy implies that this
speciﬁc user contacts repeatedly the same area codes. On
the other hand, a high value of the entropy indicates a user
that sends messages to a more random set of area codes.

Network enabled appliances report to speciﬁc servers and
data collectors or, in the case of user applications (i.e. home
monitoring), to a predeﬁned set of cell-phones. Therefore,
the entropy is the lowest. Spammers show a much more
random set of SMS abuse targets with a high entropy. Fur-
ther analysis of the spam data identiﬁes a messaging strat-
egy that consists of messaging numbers in ascendent order.
Thus, sending bulk SMSs to each area code sequentially.

The aforementioned results are summarized in Figure 8c,
which plots the correlation between the number of sent mes-

447(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 8: Distributions of the average number of destination area codes, their entropy and related scatter-
plots for spammers (red), legitimate customers (green) and M2M (blue)

ited per day. In this case, these are mobile applications such
as ﬂeet control/monitoring and asset tracking.

The ﬁnal answer to the question is found in Figure 10,
which plots the observed locations of a randomly chosen
spammer on the map of an undisclosed area. The legend in-
dicates the length on the map that corresponds to 1 mile and
2km. Based on this information, it seems that certain spam-
mers move while sending illegitimate SMSs. In the case of
the example, this spammer is observed in the vicinity of cell
sites as far as 4 miles apart. Computing the longest distance
between the cell sites every spammer camps on indicates a
maximum displacement of 15 miles.

3.4 The weapons of choice

Observations of the IMEI from CDR gives us an insight
on the kind of device used to connect to the cellular network.
Analyzing the TAC data from known and already canceled
spamming accounts, we observe that an impressive 83% of
the spammers identiﬁed in one year is sent from one of the
top ﬁve identiﬁed devices. About 65% of the spammers in
the US send messages with the top device.

Figure 9: Distribution of the average daily number
of base stations (LACCI) visited by spammers (red),
legitimate customers (green) and M2M (blue)

such as alarms and smart grid readers. Another large set of
devices are highly mobile, with an average of 28 sectors vis-

1.10.1000.00.10.20.30.40.5AveragenumberofdifferentareacodesperdayDensity01234560.00.10.20.30.40.5EntropyofareacodesDensity01020304050600.00.10.20.30.4AveragenumberoflacciperdayDensity448(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 11: Distributions of the average number of
(a) phone calls, (b) call destinations and (c) call
durations for spammers (red), legitimate customers
(green) and M2M (blue)

generate both data and voice traﬃc, perhaps to increase the
chances to go undetected through spam ﬁlters that search
for non human-like communication traﬃc or perhaps other
forms of fraud.

3.5.1 Voice calls
Figures 11a and 11b plot the empirical histograms of the
number of phone calls and their recipients. Figure 11c cor-
responds to the empirical histogram of the duration of voice

Figure 10: Example of observed locations for one
spammer

Devices used by spammers are anonymized and ranked.

The top 5 most frequently used devices are listed below.

1. USB Modem/Aircard A1

2. Feature mobile-phone M1

3. Feature mobile-phone M2

4. USB Modem/Aircard A2

5. USB Modem/Aircard A3

Thus spammers often rely on modems and aircards con-
nected to a PC via USB interface. A1, A2 and A3 belong to
this category. In parallel, spammers also use common fea-
ture phones as cellular modem. This might be done in order
to mislead detection schemes by making messages appear to
be originated at a legitimate cell-phone. Several resources
can be found online with detailed instructions on how to re-
ﬂash typical feature phones from most manufacturers with
custom ﬁrmware [2] [5] [4].

Note that these devices are legitimate hardware that
spammers use for SMS abuse. All of them are used in legit-
imate applications, which provides cover for the spam. This
is why we anonymize the make and model of these devices.
It is interesting to note that this speciﬁc traﬃc analysis
indicates that at least 16% of the SMS traﬃc originated by
all the A1 modems in the network is spam. This shows
a clear preference of spammers for this particular cellular
modem.
3.5 The Alibi: Voice and IP trafﬁc

As observed in the previous sections, SMS spammers at-
tempt to reach as many targets as possible by ﬂooding large
amounts of messages. This paper focuses on SMS spam anal-
ysis. Nevertheless, we include voice and IP traﬃc data in our
study and the results are rather interesting. Spammers do

1.10.10010000.000.020.040.060.080.10AveragenumberofvoicecallsperdayDensity1.10.0.00.10.20.30.40.5AveragenumberofvoicecallrecipientsperdayDensity1.10.1001000100000.000.050.100.15AveragecalldurationinsecondsDensity449calls. On average, spammers make many more phone calls
than legitimate users, however the average number of phone
call destinations is much lower (Figures 11a and 11b). This
number of phone calls could perhaps indicate that they are
trying to mimic legitimate users. In terms of voice traﬃc
duration, phone calls placed by spammers are much shorter
than those of legitimate users, as it can be observed on Fig-
ure 11c. This is because, despite they seem to attempt to
match the calling proﬁle of a legitimate user, these calls can-
not be sustained for a long time since the recipient will hang
up. The short call duration could also indicate that these
calls might be spam as well. Most of the times, the recipient
of a spam call will hang up immediately.

Unlike in SMS traﬃc, spammers do not ﬂood with calls a
large number of recipients. They might be communicating
with a small set of numbers that they know will pick up the
call even though they might hang up quickly.

The results are further detailed in Figure 12. Figure 12a
plots the average number of call destinations per day (y-
axis) versus the average number of calls (x-axis), in log-log
scale. One can see that spammers cluster around a large
number of calls to a small set of destinations. In parallel,
both cell-phone users and M2M devices make phone calls to
a proportional set of destinations.

(a)

(b)

Figure 12: Correlation between number of calls and
their recipients for spammers (red), legitimate cus-
tomers (green) and M2M (blue)

The diﬀerence in behavior of spammers is highly accentu-
ated in Figure 12b, which plots the average number of SMS
destinations (x-axis) against the number of voice call des-
tinations (y-axis). Spammers appear to be placing phone
calls to a set of recipients that is much smaller than the set
of targets for the text message abuse. This ﬁgure also hints
that legitimate users, on average, tend to communicate to a
larger set of contacts by phone than by text message. This
could be explained based on the fact that cell-phone users
rely on the extremely popular SMS service to communicate
with friends and relatives. However, phone calls are made
to this same set of users plus other contacts such as restau-
rants to make a reservation, the doctor’s oﬃce to make an
appointment, etc. Therefore, the set of call recipients will
be larger than for SMSs.

IP trafﬁc

3.5.2
Finally, we examine IP traﬃc. Figure 13 plots the dis-
tribution of the up-link and down-link byte counts related
to the three account categories under analysis. Spammers
generate a small amount of data, consisting on several small
transactions.

Cell-phone users and M2M systems generate asymmetric
IP data traﬃc. Regular users often consume more band-
width in the downlink, by browsing videos, media and other
kinds of content. Their uplink traﬃc is generally lower.
M2M appliances have the opposite behavior. Used mostly
as reporting tools for applications such as remote alarm and
ﬂeet control, they often generate a larger load in the uplink.

4. STOPPING THE CRIME

The results presented in this paper have been used to de-
velop an accurate SMS spam detection engine. The descrip-
tion, details and results obtained are out of the scope of
this paper, but will be submitted in the near future. In this
section, though, we oﬀer a brief overall glimpse.

An advanced SMS spam detection algorithm is proposed
based on an ensemble of decision trees. Over 40 speciﬁc fea-
tures are extracted from messaging patterns and processed
through a combination of decision trees. Moreover, in order
to speed up the spam detection process, the system focuses
on features that only require one to a few messages to ob-
tain. This algorithm also leverages the insights on M2M
SMS messaging patterns described in this paper.

5. RELATED WORK

SMS spam has not been widely discussed in literture. Nev-
ertheless, there is some work introducing diﬀerent detection
schemes. For example, the authors of [24] propose a detec-
tion engine based on analyzing the social network of connec-
tions of spammers. Other approaches are based on investi-
gating the content of SMS spam messages [12].

There is plenty of literature on spam messaging analysis
on other communication systems. The most widespread type
of spam is electronic mail (email) spam. In this context, [17]
presents interesting ﬁndings on how message abusers harvest
large lists of email addresses to use as targets for their spam
campaigns. The authors of [18] study the network-level be-
havior of spammers in the email world. Email messaging
abuse is found to originate from a very few regions of the
IP address space. This messages are generated from an im-
mense swarm of bots, each one of them sending only a few

450(a)

(b)

Figure 13: Data traﬃc pattern of spammers (red), legitimate customers (green) and M2M (blue)

pieces of mail over very short periods of time. It is inter-
esting to note that this somehow correlates with the SMS
spam world where, based on our data analysis in Section 3,
messages are originated from a few geographic hot-spots and
by accounts with a very short tenure. Based on the ﬁndings
in [18], the authors of [26] proposed an algorithm to detect
and track bot-nets based on email spam records.

Email spam has been a known problem for many years
and there is already plenty of work proposing advanced de-
tection schemes. For example, the authors of [13] study the
eﬀectiveness of DNS blacklisting and [10] presents a survey
of known spam ﬁltering techniques with particular emphasis
on how well they work.

There is also some work analyzing other kinds of spam
and messaging abuse. For example, [14] studies the traf-
ﬁc characteristics of tweet spam and propaganda. Message
(tweet) abuse is generated by a small amount of playes that
generate large amounts of messages, most of which appear
to be retweets, in short periods of time. Other interesting
works analyze messaging abuse and spam in the context of
YouTube comments [20] and the blogosphere [21]. Finally,
the authors of [9] study the risk of sophisticated context-
aware spam that could result from information sharing on
social networks.

6. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we study characteristics and traﬃc patterns
of SMS spam accounts based on real cellular network from
a tier-1 provider in the United States. The results are com-
pared against a sample of real traﬃc from legitimate cell-
phone users and M2M devices.

Conﬁrming the common presumption, we identify that
99.64% of the spammers connect using pre-paid accounts.
The simple availability of such SIM cards make them the
perfect tool for SMS abuse. Observations indicate an av-
erage age for the pre-paid accounts between 7 and 11 days.
We also ﬁnd indications of the preference spammers have for
a very small set of hardware devices. Spam traﬃc analysis
reveals that 84% of the spammers use one of the top 5 spam-
ming tools in the US. In particular, 65% of the spammers
choose to connect to the network with the top device.

We conﬁrm common intuitions about spammers, such as
the large number of text messages sent per day to a wide tar-
get list. Spammers generate two orders of magnitude more
messages than cell-phone users and one order of magnitude
greater than most M2M systems. These messages are sent
mostly to diﬀerent recipients, with a ratio of recipients to
messages sent very close to one. Further investigation of the
messaging ﬂow indicates that spammers also receive a large
number of messages. Nevertheless, the number of incoming
SMS is relatively very low with respect to the number of
transmitted spam texts.

The study of geo-location data identiﬁes the areas of
Sacramento, Los Angeles-Orange County and Miami Beach
as the major spamming hot-spots in the US. From these
locations, spammers launch very geographically distributed
campaigns targeting all area codes uniformly. Nevertheless,
some spammers are engaged in very geographically focused
spamming campaigns.
In terms of mobility, we conclude
that spammers are often mobile around their local area.

Finally, spammers are found to generate a large number
of very short phone calls and data transactions with a very
small number of end points. This could be perhaps a strat-
egy to mislead spam detection ﬁlters by replicating human-
like network traﬃc behavior.

Our traﬃc analysis indicates that certain networked appli-
ances have messaging behavior close to that of a spammer.
A small number of M2M systems transmit a large number
of SMSs per day. These are often devices that communicate
with a large number of destinations as well. Despite not be-
ing very abundant, we identify a substantial number of M2M
enabled objects with a ratio destination to number of mes-
sages very close to 1. These appliances communicate with
a large set of area codes as well. However, these area codes
have low entropy in the sense that the recipients of the mes-
sages are always the same. Based on the investigation in this
paper, we identify Machine to Machine communications as
an important player in SMS networks. Such systems should
be taken into consideration when designing SMS spam de-
tection and ﬁltering schemes. Systems designed otherwise
could incur the risk of blocking or erroneously labeling le-
gitimate text messages as message abuse.

The results presented in this paper are being used to de-

sign an advanced SMS spam detection system.

1.100.10000.1.1061.1080.00.10.20.30.40.5WeeklybytesupDensity1.100.10000.1.1061.1081.10100.00.10.20.30.4WeeklybytesdownDensity451ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Cheri Kerstetter, Rick
Becker, Joel Casey, Jeﬀ Bickford and Alex Bobotek for their
help, comments and valuable suggestions.

7. REFERENCES
[1] GSMA Spam Reporting Service Overview. GSMA and

Cloudmark. http://www.gsma.com/
spam-reporting-services-overview/.

[2] Motorola RAZR V3 Reﬂash Files by MotoX. Cell

Corner, February 2006. http://www.cellcorner.com/
unlock/phpBB2/post-19.html.

[3] 2009 Annual Security Report. Symantec MessageLabs

Intelligence, 2009.
http://www.symanteccloud.com/mlireport/
2009MLIAnnualReport_Final_PrintResolution.pdf.

[4] Samsung-Eternity Firmware Editor project. Google

Code, July 2010. http://code.google.com/p/
samsung-firmware-tools/wiki/Summary.

[5] Flashing Original or custom ﬁrmware on Nokia

mobiles using Phoenix Service software. Digi-Passion,
September 2011.
http://preview.tinyurl.com/7e38byq.

[6] 3GPP: Global System for Mobile Communications.

Digital cellular telecommunications system (phase
2+): Physical layer on the radio path: general
description. Technical report 3GPP gsm 05.01. v5.0.0,
1996. http://preview.tinyurl.com/8kgxzyq.

measurement, IMC ’04, pages 370–375, Taormina,
Sicily, Italy, 2004. ACM.

[14] C. Lumezanu, N. Feamster, and H. Klein. # bias:

Measuring the tweeting behavior of propagandists. In
Sixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, Dublin, Ireland, 2012.

[15] I. Murynets and R. Piqueras Jover. How an

SMS-Based malware infection will get throttled by the
wireless link. In Proceedings of IEEE ICC 2012 -
Communication and Information Systems Security
Symposium (ICC’12 CISS), Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,
June 2012.

[16] N. Perlroth. Spam Invades a Last Refuge, the
Cellphone. The New York Times, April 2012.
http://preview.tinyurl.com/7nwvm3g.

[17] M. Prince, B. Dahl, L. Holloway, A. Keller, and

E. Langheinrich. Understanding how spammers steal
your e-mail address: An analysis of the ﬁrst six
months of data from project honey pot. In Second
Conference on Email and Anti-Spam, CEAS ’05,
Stanford, CA, USA, 2005.

[18] A. Ramachandran and N. Feamster. Understanding

the network-level behavior of spammers. In ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review,
volume 36, pages 291–302. ACM, 2006.

[19] V. Shannon. 15 years of text messages, a ’cultural

phenomenon’, December 2007.
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/05/technology/
05iht-sms.4.8603150.html?pagewanted=all.

[7] M. Ablot. SMS on the decline as third–party

[20] A. Sureka. Mining user comment activity for detecting

messaging gains traction. Wireless Inteligence,
November 2011. http://informationweek.com/news/
healthcare/mobile-wireless/232301072.

[8] A. Bobotek. Threat of Mobile Malware and Abuse.
Messaging Anti-Abuse Working Group (MAAWG),
October 2010.
http://wnss.sv.cmu.edu/wms/2010/wms_talk01.pdf.

[9] G. Brown, T. Howe, M. Ihbe, A. Prakash, and

K. Borders. Social networks and context-aware spam.
In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work, CSCW ’08,
pages 403–412, San Diego, CA, USA, 2008. ACM.

[10] G. Cormack. Email spam ﬁltering: A systematic
review. Foundations and Trends in Information
Retrieval, 1(4):335–455, 2007.

[11] G. V. Cormack, J. M. G. Hidalgo, and E. P. S´anz.

Feature engineering for mobile (SMS) spam ﬁltering.
In Proceedings of the 30th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, SIGIR ’07, pages 871–872,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2007. ACM.

[12] J. M. G´omez Hidalgo, G. C. Bringas, E. P. S´anz, and

F. C. Garc´ıa. Content based sms spam ﬁltering. In
Proceedings of the 2006 ACM symposium on
Document engineering, DocEng ’06, pages 107–114,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2006. ACM.

[13] J. Jung and E. Sit. An empirical study of spam traﬃc
and the use of dns black lists. In Proceedings of the 4th
ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet

forum spammers in youtube. CoRR, Vol.
abs/1103.5044, 2011.

[21] A. Thomason. Blog spam: A review. In Conference on

Email and Anti-Spam, CEAS ’07, Mountain View,
CA, USA, 2007.

[22] Universal Mobile Telecommunications

System (UMTS). Physical layer procedures (FDD).
3GPP TS 25.214 Release 1999. v8.9.0, 1999.
http://preview.tinyurl.com/98ex9hw.

[23] Universal Mobile Telecommunications

System (UMTS). Digital cellular telecommunications
system (phase 2+): Universal mobile
telecommunications system (UMTS), technical
realization of the short message service (SMS).
Technical report 3GPP TS 23.040. v10.0.0, 2011.
http://preview.tinyurl.com/9cs3wdo.

[24] C. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, Z. Liu, L. Shi, G. Chen,

F. Qiu, C. Ying, and W. Lu. A behavior-based sms
antispam system. IBM Journal of Research and
Development, 54(6):3–1, 2010.

[25] N. Zablotskaya. Fraudulent spam. Securelist, July
2008. http://www.securelist.com/en/analysis/
204792012/Fraudulent_spam.

[26] L. Zhuang, J. Dunagan, D. Simon, H. Wang,

I. Osipkov, G. Hulten, and J. Tygar. Characterizing
botnets from email spam records. In Proceedings of the
1st Usenix Workshop on Large-Scale Exploits and
Emergent Threats, number 2 in LEET ’08, pages 1–9,
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2008. USENIX Association.

452