Detection of On-Road Vehicles Emanating GPS

Interference

Gorkem Kar†, Hossen Mustafa♯, Yan Wang‡

Yingying Chen‡, Wenyuan Xu♯, Marco Gruteser†, Tam Vu∗

†Winlab, Rutgers University, North Brunswick, NJ 08902, USA

†{gkar87,gruteser}@winlab.rutgers.edu

‡Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA

‡{ywang48,yingying.chen}@stevens.edu

♯University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA

♯{mustafah, wyxu} @cse.sc.edu

∗University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO 80204, USA

∗tam.vu@ucdenver.edu

Abstract
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is widely used in criti-
cal infrastructures but is vulnerable to radio frequency (RF)
interference. A common source of interference are commer-
cial drivers that use GPS jammers to circumvent vehicle
tracking systems. Existing mechanisms to detect and iden-
tify such interference emitting vehicles on roadways require
a large number of specialized detectors or a manual observa-
tion process. In this paper, we design a practical, automated
system to facilitate enforcement actions. Our system com-
bines information from roadside monitoring points at key lo-
cations along the roadway as well as mobile detectors (e.g.,
smartphones and other mobile GPS systems). Rather than
attempting precise localization at a given time, the system
exploits the inherent variation in driving speeds and the re-
sulting diverging trajectories of vehicles to uniquely identify
the interfering vehicle. Through our experiments on a lo-
cal highway with a vehicle transmitting interference in the
900MHz ISM band, we found that the vehicle identiﬁcation
rate of our mechanism is 65% for a single-point setup and
100% for a two-point setup. We performed 200 hours of pas-
sive monitoring of GPS L1 band on roadways and found two
episodes of real interference. We also demonstrate that our
mobile detector-based proﬁles are suﬃciently consistent in
time and space to enable reliable interference detection.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.5.0 [Computer System Implementation]: [General]

Keywords
GPS; jamming; vehicular

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS’14, November 3–7, 2014, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2957-6/14/11 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660336.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Many networked systems, particularly in the transporta-
tion domain rely on the Global Positioning System (GPS)
for location tracking. For example, automatic vehicle lo-
cator system are installed in truck ﬂeets to monitor deliv-
ery progress and optimize routes [19], in taxicabs to facil-
itate cab-passenger scheduling [4], and also in aeronautical
applications such as landing systems.
If current plans for
connected vehicles with Vehicle-2-Vehicle Dedicated Short
Range Communications [28] are any guide, this reliance on
GPS will only increase. In this eﬀort, vehicles are expected
to broadcast their current GPS reading and recent trajec-
tory multiple times per second, so that each vehicle can be
aware of nearby vehicle movements and use this information
to improve eﬃciency and safety.

GPS Interference and Jamming. This reliance on
GPS has also exposed its susceptibility to interference. Due
to the 20,200km distance to the transmitting satellites, the
received signal strength is extremely low at about -125dBm.
This is much weaker than in most other wireless commu-
nication systems and below the noise ﬂoor. These signals
can therefore easily be masked by other transmissions, ei-
ther from jammers or malfunctioning electronic equipment.
A particular source of concern are in-vehicle GPS jammers.
These appear to be used mainly by drivers to gain loca-
tion privacy, that is to prevent employer-installed GPS vehi-
cle tracking systems from recording their trajectories. GPS
jammers are easy to use, some can be simply plugged into the
vehicles cigarette lighter for power, and require no knowl-
edge about the vehicle tracking system or the location of
the GPS receiver. They can be removed as easily as they
are installed and leave no evidence of tampering. To be ef-
fective regardless of the type and mounting position of the
GPS antenna and across vehicle types from large commercial
trucks to small passenger vehicles, the output power of these
devices will have to be relatively high. Such generously pro-
portioned output powers, however, increase the likelihood
of interfering with other nearby receivers. For this reason,
the United States and many other countries have signiﬁcant
regulatory restrictions in place for such devices.

The Detection Challenge. Still, both anecdotal evi-
dence such as incidents at Newark Airport and a study in
the UK [7] indicate that use of jamming devices is common

621Figure 1: Overview of jamming detection system consisting
of monitoring points, mobile detectors, and central oﬃce for
camera-based vehicle identiﬁcation.

Figure 2: (a) shows one of the commonly available jammer
and (b) shows the spectrogram of a 8 MHz wide jamming
signal generated using Matlab function.

(a) GPS jammer

(b) Spectrogram of a jamming signal

enough so that it can interfere with current critical infras-
tructure and could be a concern in any future connected ve-
hicle deployment. Moving jammers might appear to cause
only brief interference and be less of a concern. However,
some GPS systems, particularly stationary ones, may not
be designed to expect frequent interference and even a short
interference spike could cause malfunction (as in the initial
Newark airport system). For mobile GPS receivers passing
at high speed, this may be less of an issue, but receivers in
vehicles driving along with the interferer could still experi-
ence outages over several minutes. Presumably regulatory
restrictions can reduce their use, but enforcing these restric-
tions, particularly at the individual vehicle level, is very la-
bor intensive. The accuracy of standard wireless localization
techniques [14, 16, 23] is usually not suﬃcient to pinpoint
a particular vehicle in dense traﬃc. Current methods re-
quire manually pointing a handheld monitoring device with
a directional antenna receiver at individual vehicles to scan
for emissions. Expending this level of eﬀort1 is usually only
practical when frequent interference has been reported at a
ﬁxed location.

Automated Monitoring and Detection. This paper
seeks to overcome these challenges with an automated in-
terference detection and vehicle identiﬁcation system, with
includes roadside interference monitors, mobile interference
detectors and camera-based vehicle identiﬁcation, as shown
in Figure 1. The roadside component of such a system could
remain in continuous operation near critical infrastructure
and thereby quickly identify interference in such areas. The
mobile detectors that leverage smartphones or other mobile
devices opportunistically to identify interference can achieve
wide coverage at low overhead. It requires a special proﬁling
approach, however, to distinguish interference from benign
fading and attenuation based on the limited GPS perfor-

1As an example, consider a case at Newark airport where
repeated interference at GPS reference receivers from the
landing system was observed [15].
It took many months
for FAA/FCC investigators to locate one jammer. During
this time frame, FAA/FCC teams convened with contrac-
tors twice for three day investigation sessions until it was
determined that the interference source is mobile and mov-
ing on the I-95 highway next to the airport. In an additional
session, the FAA/FCC team with contractors used a spec-
trum analyzer on an overpass to identify a set of candidate
vehicles that might carry a jammer. These vehicles were
then pursued with patrol vehicles carrying mobile interfer-
ence detectors or spectrum analyzers until a single vehicle
could be isolated (apparently based on interference signal
strength and proximity to the patrol car). This vehicle was
then stopped to conﬁrm that a jamming device is present
inside the vehicle.

mance indicators available on widely used mobile devices.
Our approach combines data from multiple detections to
identify vehicles. The inherent variation of driving speeds
means that a group of cars that passes a ﬁrst monitoring
point together likely has dispersed at a later monitoring
point, which allows unique identiﬁcation of the vehicle emit-
ting such signals. The salient contributions of this work are
summarized below.

• We propose an automated two-pronged interference
monitoring framework with roadside monitoring sta-
tions and mobile detectors that can achieve wide cov-
erage at low cost.

• We design proﬁle-based algorithms that detect GPS

signal anomalies based on widely available satellite signal-
to-noise ratio measurements (e.g., accessible from An-
droid apps). Even though GPS signals are highly vari-
able due to fading, our method of constructing signal
proﬁles is suﬃciently robust to allow interference de-
tection without any specialized chipset functions.

• Instead of precise triangulation with multiple receivers
to locate the interference source, our system can work
with just a single detector (assuming repeated com-
muting by the jammer) or at most two detectors to
identify the interference source.

• We evaluate through multiple days of roadway exper-
iments on local highways the likelihood that a mon-
itoring station can uniquely identify an interference
emitting vehicle and show that unique identiﬁcation
is possible with two appropriately spaced monitoring
stations in most cases.

• We use our system to investigate the prevalence of GPS
interference on US public roadways. During 200 hours
of passive monitoring in two US cities, we captured
two instances of interference.

2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW

Our proposed detection system uses unmanned roadside
monitoring stations in critical locations (e.g., airports) and
crowdsourced GPS signal-to-noise ratio data from mobile
phones or vehicles to achieve broad coverage. It is designed
to signiﬁcantly reduce the eﬀort required to detect and track
down interference in the civilian use L1 GPS carrier at 1.57542
GHz. We envision that such a system can be used for identi-
fying malfunctioning equipment that generates interference
or for enforcement actions against GPS jammers.

622Centralized Camera-based Vehicle Identification

Peak Prediction 

Candidate Source

Predicting Recording 

Path

Zone Identification

Vehicle Identification

Time Zone

Interpolation

jamming incident

jamming incident

Energy-based Jamming Detection

Wireless 
Receiver

Interference 

Detector

Signal 
Analyzer

C/N0-based Jamming Detection

GPS Data 
Collector

Interference 

Detector

Jamming  
Validator

1

2

3

Y

N

Monitoring Point

1

2

3

Y

M

Mobile Detector

Figure 3:
Overview of our GPS jamming detection
methodology. Each monitoring point uses a USRP for cap-
turing wireless data and each mobile detector uses phone’s
GPS APIs to collect SNR values. The centralized camera-
based vehicle identiﬁcation system uses traﬃc camera im-
ages for accurate vehicle identiﬁcation.

2.1 Attack Model: Personal Privacy GPS Jam-

mers

The attackers are mainly drivers that want to gain loca-
tion privacy by circumventing employer-installed GPS ve-
hicle tracking systems with GPS jammers. We target rela-
tively widespread low-cost jammers that are used as personal
privacy devices rather than sophisticated defense-related equip-
ment. Such personal privacy devices are often small jammers
that can be powered by an automotive power outlet.

These GPS jammers simply overpower GPS signals with
interference. Although some advanced jammers can block
the L1, L2, L3, L4 and L5 bands, the most commonly used
ones block only the L1 band. Such GPS jammers can be
categorized into two categories in terms of signal character-
istics [1]: (a) Continuous wave jammers simply transmit an
unmodulated continuous wave signal with a bandwidth less
than 100 kHz [24], and (b) Chirp jammers transmit diﬀerent
types of narrowband and wideband chirp signals where the
chirp signal can be a saw-tooth function, a multiple saw-
tooth function, or a frequency bursts.

The jamming bandwidth ranges from 0.92 kHz to 44.9
MHz and the output power varies from -9.5 dBm to -30.8
dBm [2]. Chirp signal jammers are most common [2]—we
show an example in Figure 2(a). For our experiments and
analysis, we generated a chirp signals similar to the charac-
teristics reported by Bauernfeind et al [2]. An 8 MHz chirp
signal is depicted in Figure 2(b).

2.2 Design Requirements

Towards this goal, we identify the following design require-
ments for identifying vehicles emanating GPS interference.

• Automated. The detection and identiﬁcation system
should be able to operate around the clock with lim-
ited human intervention. While manual examination
of detection results may still be required, continuous
human presence at a monitoring location should not
be necessary.

• Low-cost. To facilitate widespread usage, infrastruc-
ture costs should be minimal. Some infrastructure is
appropriate for priority locations around critical GPS
infrastructure (e.g., airports).

• High accuracy. Identifying the source of the inter-
ference source should be accurate enough to support
enforcement actions. False positive can lead to incon-
veniencing innocent drivers and false negative repre-
sents missed detections.

2.3 Challenges

Identifying GPS jammers carried by vehicles in roadways

is challenging for several reasons.

Availability of GPS performance metrics. Widely
used GPS receivers only provide high-level GPS performance
metrics that are not obvious indicators of interference. Iden-
tiﬁcation of interference in the GPS L1 band is not partic-
ularly diﬃcult with specialized equipment or high perfor-
mance GPS receivers that monitor interference conditions.
Such equipment, however, is costly or at least not in wide-
spread use. Many GPS receivers only allow monitoring satel-
lite signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) and outages (i.e., a loss of
the position ﬁx). Both metrics, however, are also aﬀected
by the varying signal conditions under normal operation.

Vehicle identiﬁcation in complex environment. Road-

ways present both a complex radio propagation and traﬃc
environment. The radio propagation on a multi-lane high-
way is highly irregular because of the strong attenuation and
fading caused by the metal bodies of vehicles, the Doppler
shift introduced by high traveling speeds, and unpredictable
radio propagation paths due to the dynamic traﬃc patterns.
All the irregularity make it challenging to accurately identify
the vehicle that carries a GPS jammer.

Several projects have proposed to localize GPS jammers,
but none of them can automatically identify vehicles with
GPS jammers accurately and economically. For instance,
most of the latest research on GPS jammer localization are
based on the time diﬀerence of arrival (TDOA) technique [14],
[16], [23]. However, TDOA-based approach requires either
high accurate synchronization between multiple observing
stations or the prior knowledge of GPS jamming signals.
In addition, these localization mechanisms are not accurate
enough to identify a single vehicle. While some of them can
localize the source of jamming signals with an accuracy of 5
meters in certain cases, this is still not suﬃcient to distin-
guish two vehicles driving on adjacent lanes. Thus, a new
vehicle identiﬁcation solution is in need.

2.4 Approach

We chose a two-pronged approach with specialized road-

side detectors and mobile detectors because the former promise
higher system accuracy around critical infrastructure and
the latter oﬀer low-cost, broad coverage of an entire trans-
portation network. As shown in Figure 3, both types of
detectors will report signal anomalies to a centralized sys-
tem. Rather than attempting precise localization at a single
point in time, the system uses multiple reports to identify
the source vehicle. To do so, it must have access to vehi-
cle identiﬁcation information such as electronic toll system
identiﬁers or camera footage that reveals license plates. We
focus here on the latter as an example.

For specialized roadside equipment, there exist established
detection methods. In the interest of low complexity, we rely
on energy-based detection, wherein a Wireless Receiver
continuously monitors the GPS L1 frequency band and the
Interference Detector monitors whether energy exceeds
the normal noise levels at this location. Suspicious signals
can further be validated against established jamming pat-
terns by the Signal Analyzer and are reported to the cen-
tralized system together with their location.

Interference detection is most challenging when seeking to
collect interference data from widely deployed, mobile GPS
receivers. We chose to focus on smartphone GPS receivers
accessible through Android apps, because this is arguably

623the most common GPS platform. For example, such mo-
bile detectors could be carried in government vehicle ﬂeets
or with appropriate energy optimizations oﬀered as an An-
droid background service to the public. The Android plat-
form makes available carrier-to-noise density ratio—loosely
called signal-to-noise (SNR)—measurements of each satellite
in addition to the GPS position data, but does not provide
any information that would directly indicate interference.
Interference, however, can be expected to manifest itself as
additional noise at the receiver and therefore decrease the
carrier to noise density ratio (or, a loss of ﬁx, in the ex-
treme). The challenges lie in distinguishing this eﬀect from
signal fading or attenuation, which is prevalent in wireless
propagation environments and also leads to carrier to noise
density ratio decreases or outages.

Our mobile detection approach therefore proﬁles the en-
vironment to establish reference signal levels for a certain
receiver. Signals are then classiﬁed as anomalies, when they
deviate signiﬁcantly from this proﬁle. They can be fur-
ther validated by detecting abnormal patterns in carrier-
to-noise-density ratio variations. These three steps make
up the GPS Data Collector, Interference Detector, and
Jamming Validator components. We discuss detection in
more detail in Section 3.

The centralized camera-based vehicle identiﬁcation com-
ponent identiﬁes a vehicle using images from roadside units
or traﬃc cameras. For roadside detection, it is most conve-
nient to have cameras collocated with the interference de-
tector. Still, in many cases one can expect multiple vehicles
to be present in the image and it will be diﬃcult to iden-
tify which one is the interference source. We address this
challenge by relying on multiple detections in time or space.
Since groups of vehicles will eventually disperse, multiple
detections (of the same jammer) will eventually show only
one common vehicle. When mobile detections are reported,
there may not be any camera available at this location. In
this case, the system will have to interpolate the vehicles
path to a camera location, and work with a larger set of
candidate vehicles to account for the path estimation uncer-
tainties. Still, with a suﬃcient number of detections, unique
identiﬁcation can be expected. We discuss this component
in Section 4.

3.

JAMMING DETECTION

While many sophisticated jamming detection solution ex-
ist, we focus here on techniques that can be implemented
with existing widely available GPS receiver hardware or low
cost software radios. In particular, we develop a carrier-to-
noise proﬁling approach which only relies on the carrier-to-
noise metrics (sometimes imprecisely referred to as signal-
to-noise ratio) reported by most GPS receivers. This met-
ric is even accessible for apps through the Android location
API. We also consider energy detection which can easily be
implemented on dedicated monitoring devices and is also
supported in more sophisticated GPS receivers. While not
nearly as widely available as the carrier-to-noise metric, en-
ergy detection allows a more direct measure of interference
since it does not need to account for variations in satellite
signal propagation.

3.1 Carrier-to-Noise Proﬁling

To achieve broad coverage with this monitoring system,
we design a solution that can take advantage of existing
GPS chips and devices such as smartphones or in-car GPS

Algorithm 1 Mobile Detector
1: function profileSNR(n, d)

⊲ record time series data for n satellites

< time, SN Rsat, lat, lon >= record data(n)
p = calculate path distance(lat, lon)
for each path segment pi with length d do

end for

satsnr(pi) = get sat snr(SN Rsat)
msnr(pi) = average(satsnr(pi))
τsnr(pi) = mode(satsnr(pi))
σsnr(pi) = std dev(satsnr(pi))
save prof ile(pi, msnr, τsnr, σsnr)

2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11: end function
12: function detectSNRAnomaly(n, k, pi)
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26: end function

satsnr = read sat snr(n)
msnr = average(satsnr)
τsnr = mode(satsnr)
σsnr = std dev(satsnr)
< mpr, τpr, σpr >= get prof ile(pi)
δ = mpr − k ∗ σpr
if msnr + (τpr − τsnr) ≤ δ then

end if

end if

jamming status = verif y all sat()
if jamming status = true then

[lat, lon] = get location()
send report(lat, lon, msnr)

receivers connected to telematics units. The carrier-to-noise
density ratio (C/N0) is the most ﬁne-grained GPS perfor-
mance measure that conveys information about interference
and is provided by nearly every GPS chip as well as made
accessible through the NMEA standard or through the An-
droid API. It is the ratio of the satellite signal power to
noise density and is often somewhat imprecisely referred to
as signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in many GPS interface docu-
mentations.2

The C/N0 is primarily aﬀected by signal variations which
are due to fading, both from obstructions (e.g., skyscrapers,
tall billboards), satellite movement, and multipath propaga-
tion. Under interference conditions, however, the interfering
signal acts similar to noise on the satellite signal reception
process. The reported C/N0 is therefore usually a signal-
to-interference-plus-noise density ratio, which will decrease
when either interference increases or signal fading occurs.

The challenge is then to distinguish fading from interfer-
ence. We propose to detect abnormally low SNR values by
comparing them with SNR proﬁles that characterize typical
fading variations at a location. We rely here on three key
observations: (i) in-vehicle jammers and interferers are mo-
bile and rarely dwell for an extended amount of time in the
same location (indeed, they are usually deactivated when a
vehicle parks); (ii) vehicles pathways are highly constrained
by roadways and tend to repeatedly pass through those; (iii)
most signiﬁcant signal fading is cause by stationary struc-
tures such as tall buildings, underpasses, tunnels, etc. The
ﬁrst observation leads us to the heuristic that a temporarily
low SNR at a particular location is indicative of interference,

2In wireless communications, SNR typically includes noise
over the entire receiver bandwidth, while C/N0 uses noise
density, that is noise over 1 Hz. We use the terms inter-
changeably here to refer to the carrier-to-noise ratio density.

624while a more permanently low SNR at a particular location
is more likely due to obstructions in the built environment.
The second and third observations leads us to the idea to
construct a proﬁle of typical signal levels at each location.
If detectors are mobile, each small interval of length d along
a roadway is treated as a separate location, which will even-
tually lead to a signal map. By comparing current SNR
readings with this proﬁle, rather than a global threshold, we
can then perform outlier detection to determine whether the
readings are unusually low for this particular location. This
should signiﬁcantly reduce false positives. Thus, our algo-
rithm contains two stages: proﬁling, and jamming detection.
The generalized mobile version is shown in Algorithm 1 and
we describe the individual stages next.

Proﬁling. In this stage, we ﬁrst collect C/N0 values along
a route from the n strongest satellites for each of the posi-
tion readings along the route. Note that as satellites orbit
the earth, the identity of these satellites will change but
we found C/N0 readings to be suﬃciently consistent to not
warrant further distinction. For each interval pi along a
roadway, we calculate and store the mean m, the mode τ ,
and the standard deviation σ of the C/N0 values from all
satellites and all position updates within this interval. By
calculating a mean over multiple C/N0 readings (from diﬀer-
ent satellites but also diﬀerent locations within the interval
or diﬀerent trips), we will average out multipath eﬀects and
the approach becomes more robust to small scale fading.
The mode is provided as a statistic that is more robust to
outliers. We chose 20m as the interval length d, because it
is suﬃciently ﬁne-grained to capture signal variations cause
by smaller structures, and large enough so that usually at
least one sample from a trip falls into this interval. These
values comprise the proﬁle and can be continuously updated
as additional C/N0 data from the same location arrives (i.e.,
the vehicle travels over the same road again).

Anomaly Detection. In this stage, we use the param-
eter recorded in the proﬁling stage to determine whether
the SNR at a particular location is abnormally low. First,
the current reported latitude and longitude are mapped to
a particular road interval pi. Second, we will again calcu-
late the mean SNR msnr over all satellites and all location
updates from the current trip that fall into this interval.
This is reasonable even if we expect interference, because
(i) interference will aﬀect all satellites equally since they are
transmitting on the same L1 carrier and (ii) in most cases
interference will be present long enough for the vehicle to
travel a short distance d (e.g., 20m). Thus, the averaging is
unlikely to remove the eﬀect of interference.

The mean of the proﬁle and the sigma of the proﬁle are
then used to derive a threshold for outlier detection. An
abnormal signal report is generated if msnr < mpr − k ∗ σpr.
Since the normal distribution is often successfully used to
model the distribution of SNR readings one might expect
at a given distance, it can serve also as a guide for deter-
mining the k parameter of the threshold. While this is not
necessary for built-in vehicle GPS receivers with external
antennas, the threshold for portable GPS receivers can be
further calibrated to account for placement diﬀerences in-
side the vehicle from one trip to the next. For this purpose,
the algorithm will also track the mode of the SNR τsnr over
an extended distance dext, which is chosen longer than the
longest expected interference duration. The algorithm then
estimates the proﬁle mode over the same extended interval
based on the mpr that make up this interval. The diﬀerence

Peak zone 

Determined 
by Antenna 

Determined 
by Antenna 

Traffic Direction 

Zone 1 

Monitoring 
Point 

Figure 4: Ladder-shaped detection zone on the road.

between this estimated proﬁle mode and the current mea-
sured mode is a calibration parameter that will be added to
msnr before the comparison.

When the SNR falls below this threshold, a signal anomaly
report can be transmitted to a central oﬃce. This report will
contain the diﬀerence between the threshold and the mean
SNR value as well as the current or the last known GPS
location, if the current one is unavailable. In the latter case,
the ﬁrst new location ﬁx may also be provided subsequently,
to allow a better estimation of the location of the low signal.
Complete outages, where no satellites can be detected, are
treated as the lowest possible SNR value in the algorithm.
The low signal report can further include indicators of de-
tected signal characteristics which imply a higher conﬁdence
that this signal level is due to jamming, such as the high
variance described earlier. The central oﬃce can take the
magnitude of the SNR diﬀerence and such indicators into
account, when determining the reliability of such reports.

3.2 Comparison with Energy-based Detection
Roadside units designed for interference monitoring can
rely on many custom techniques to detect interference. En-
ergy detection is a simple yet eﬀective technique in the GPS
band, since the GPS signal level is typically below the ther-
mal noise ﬂoor (conﬁrmed in our experiments). Therefore,
any energy-level above the noise ﬂoor is unwanted interfer-
ence. This approach greatly simpliﬁes the choice of detection
threshold since no signal variations have to be taken into ac-
count but it requires hardware that supports such metrics.
Based on these considerations, we chose the carrier-to-
noise-proﬁling approach in our mobile smartphone detectors
and implemented energy detection in our dedicated road-
side detector using a Universal Software Radio Peripheral
(USRP) N210 [8] in conjunction with a WBX daughterboard
and with GNURADIO [11] scripts. The roadside unit ﬁrst
automatically sets the threshold value just above the am-
bient noise level. For monitoring, the wireless receiver
block (Figure 3) continuously captures 10 milliseconds of
data and passes it to interference detector block. When
the energy becomes larger than the threshold (−75dBm
to −83dBm in our experiments), the interference detec-
tor records a suspicious signal and reports it together with
timestamp information. A signal analyzer can optionally
conduct temporal and spectral analysis to gain additional
conﬁdence in the report.

4. SOURCE VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION

In this section, we describe how to correlate the detection
with license plates from traﬃc camera footage to allow iden-
tiﬁcation of a set of candidate vehicles and how this set can
be narrowed down to a unique vehicle after multiple detec-
tions. While we discuss this in the context of traﬃc cameras,
similar methods could be applied to other vehicle identiﬁ-

625 

Practical positions of     
transmitting vehicle at t

m
Theoretical positions of   
transmitting vehicle at t

m

Derived peak detection
zone                  

10

8

6

4

2

r
o

t
c
e

t

e
d

 

e
h

t
 

o

t
 

e
c
n
a

t
s
D

i

d
a
o
r
 

e
h

t
 

o

l

i

t
 
r
a
u
c
d
n
e
p
r
e
p

0

 
−40

−20

0

20

40

Distance to the detector along the road

Figure 5: Positions of transmitting vehicle passing by the
detector at time tm when the maximum energy value is iden-
tiﬁed in multiple experimental runs in real-road scenarios.
cation methods such as IDs from electronic toll collection
systems.
4.1 Identiﬁcation Using Roadside Detector

To facilitate vehicle identiﬁcation, the system needs to
map an energy detection to a portion of a video obtained
from a traﬃc camera that the monitoring point is collocated
with. It is therefore convenient to focus the wireless detec-
tions on a smaller area that is in view of the camera. This
can be achieved by using a directional antenna at the moni-
toring point and results in a trapezoidal area of the roadway
from which signals can be detected. Such a detection zone
is illustrated in Figure 4 (marked as Zone 1 ). Let us ﬁrst
consider a naive approach to identify a set of candidate vehi-
cles. Given a time interval [ts, te] during which interference
was detected, consider every vehicle that was sighted in the
monitoring zone at least at one point of this time interval.
In practice, however it is challenging to determine this zone
since it not only depends on wireless propagation eﬀects but
also the transmission power and antenna of a jammer.

Deriving Peak Detection Zone. To address this we
use the concept of a peak detection zone. As an interfering
vehicle approaches and leaves, the received signals at the
monitoring point can be expected to rise and fall, respec-
tively. By considering only the moment tm at which the
energy of interference signals peaks, we can deﬁne a smaller
peak detection zone.

Theoretically the energy of interference signals reaches the
maximum value when the transmitting vehicle is at the clos-
est position to the detector. These closest positions are along
a line perpendicular to the road and passing through the de-
tector (red dotted line in Figure 4). Due to multipath such
as reﬂections of interference signals by other vehicle bodies,
there is however some uncertainty regarding the exact posi-
tion of the vehicle when energy peaks. We therefore use a
peak detection zone as the area that includes all those pos-
sible positions (i.e., the red trapezoid in Figure 4).

This discussion implicitly assumed omnidirectional trans-
mitters. For a transmitter that is using a directional an-
tenna, the peak may in theory not occur when the transmit-
ting vehicle is closest to the detector but most commercially
available jammer in the market have omnidirectional anten-
nas and in practice, the tolerance zone can compensate many
discrepancies.

Obtaining the boundary of the peak detection zone theo-
retically is complicated and thus we identify the zone empir-
ically. We use the following steps: 1) For each experiment,
we identify the position (pm) of the transmitting vehicle at
the moment tm by examining the recorded video; 2) draw
a ladder-shaped area to cover all the marked vehicle posi-
tions (pm) across all the lanes. Figure 5 shows the identiﬁed

vehicle positions at the moment tm for the 20 rounds of real-
road experiments. Empirically, we determine that the peak
detection zone for our receiver conﬁguration can be enclosed
by an trapezoid with a width of about 15 meters. Overall,
the results are encouraging as it indicates it is possible to
derive a peak detection zone that minimizes the number of
candidate vehicles to uniquely identify the source vehicle.

4.2 Identiﬁcation Using Mobile Detector

When multiple mobile devices (e.g., smartphones) on the
road detecting the presence of the GPS jamming/interference,
our system can track and predict the movement of the jam-
mer on the road and coordinate with the roadside cameras
to capture the candidate interference vehicle.

Determining the Moving Direction of Jamming
/Interference Source. When the GPS jamming /interfer-
ence is detected by a mobile detector (e.g., a smartphone),
it is possible to determine the moving direction of the vehi-
cle emanating interference by utilizing the detection period,
which is the time period that the mobile detector ﬁnds low
GPS SNR (i.e., below the detection threshold). The ra-
tionale behind this is if the mobile detector moves in the
opposite direction as the jammer, the detection period will
be very short, typically 1-2s. Whereas if the mobile detec-
tor moves towards the same direction as the jammer, the
detection period will be longer than few seconds. Thus, by
utilizing a time threshold we can determine the relative di-
rection of the GPS jamming source.

Intuitively, the mobile detector moving in the opposite di-
rection as the source vehicle is the most common case, since
a vehicle has much more chances to encounter diﬀerent ve-
hicles in the opposite direction than in the same direction.
Therefore, we focus on the cases when the moving direction
of the source vehicle is opposite to that of the mobile detec-
tor. Since the source vehicle is moving along the road, it is
reasonable that there are multiple mobile detectors sequen-
tially detecting the presence of jamming at several diﬀerent
locations on the road. It is thus possible to determine the
speeds of the source vehicle and its estimated locations, and
further perform the path interpolation to estimate the time
when the source vehicle passes the closest installed roadside
camera.

To estimate the number of mobile detectors needed to
guarantee at least one detector-jammer encounter, we built
an emulation to analyze an actual dataset, called Next Gen-
eration SIMulation (NGSIM) [12]. The dataset contains
actual trajectories of more than 2100 vehicles recorded by
video cameras mounted on the side of an urban highway in
North Hollywood, CA during a 15min rush hour period. The
emulation randomly selects one vehicle to be a jammer and
M vehicles to be mobile detectors. For each selection, the
emulation looks at the vehicles’ traveling timestamps and
trajectories to detect if any mobile detector encounters the
jammer. The emulator repeats 10,000 times for each value
of M ranging between 1 and 10. The results shows that the
jammer can be encountered 92% of the time with 10 mobile
detectors. The number reduces to 91%, 83%, 74%, 67%, and
51% when the number of monitoring points reduces to 9, 5,
3, 2 and 1 respectively.

Estimating Recording Time Zone.
Next, we ﬁrst present how to estimate the speed of the
source vehicle based on two GPS signal SNRs observations
from a single mobile detector at two time points. Then
we discuss how to determine the recording time zone by

626leveraging the estimated speed and location of the source
vehicle.

Assuming that at time t1 the mobile detector detects the
presence of GPS jamming on a road with the opposite direc-
tion, the detector reports its speed vm, the maximum SNRs
of the GPS signal before the detection S 0 and after the de-
tection S 1 to a centralized server. Based on S 0 and S 1, the
central server can calculate the noise power after the detec-
tion as N1 = S 0 − S 1 + N0. Then it can obtain the jamming
signal’s amplitude by subtracting the thermal noise from the
noise after the detection, and further estimate the jamming
signal power by taking the square of the jamming signal’s
amplitude using the equation:

− p10N0/10)2,

ˆJ1 = 10 log10 (p10N1/10

(1)
where N0 can be calculated with room temperature and sig-
nal bandwidth [26]. Note that the ˆJ1 in Equation (1) is
converted to decibel unit. Since most civilian GPS jammers
have similar jamming power [2], the central server can esti-
mate the relative distance d1 between the jammer and the
detector with the estimated jamming signal power ˆJ1 based
on the free-space path loss model[22]. Similarly, the central
server can estimate the relative distance d2 = d1 − ∆d at
time t2 = t1 + ∆t by using the S 0 and another maximum
SNR S 2 reported by the detector at time t2 (within the de-
tection period). The estimated speed of the source vehicle
ˆvJ can be calculated as following:

ˆvJ = (∆d)/(∆t) + vm,

(2)
The estimated speed of the source vehicle keeps updating
whenever there are new smartphones reporting the detec-
tion of the jamming/interference. Assuming the individual
vehicle speeds follow a invariant normal distribution [18],
the central server can ﬁt the ˆvJ in Equation (2) to a normal
distribution N (µv, δv), where µv and δv are the mean and
standard deviation of the speed, respectively. Since the cen-
tral server can also estimate/track the locations of the source
vehicle by utilizing the last-ﬁxed locations reported by mo-
bile detectors on the road, when the central server ﬁnds that
the source vehicle will pass a roadside camera that is at a
distance of dc away, it can estimate the traveling time of the
vehicle to reach the camera as:

ˆtc = (dc)/(µv ),

(3)
and start recording on the camera around ˆtc to capture
the candidate vehicles. We deﬁne the recording time zone as
{ˆtc − θ1, ˆtc + θ2}, where θ1 and θ2 are adjustable parameters
capturing the estimation errors, which can be calculated as
following in our work:

θ1 = (dc · 3δv)/(µv(µv + 3δv)),
θ2 = (dc · 3δv)/(µv(µv − 3δv)).

(4)

To get an understanding of the relationship between θ and
the distance from the interference observation, we analyze
the diﬀerence in travel time of vehicles on a common road
segment using the NGSIM dataset mentioned above. The
emulation randomly selects 2000 pairs of intervals that are
100 to 500m long on this road segment. It then calculates the
amount of time it takes for each vehicle to travel through this
interval. Figures 13 shows the distribution of travel time for
each interval length, in 100 meter increments. The spread
in travel times is directly related to theta. For example, the
results show vehicles took between 25 to 55s to travel the
500 meters intervals. This means that if the camera is 500
meters away from the mobile detection, an appropriate size
for θ1 and θ2 would be 15s, which together results in the 30s
spread in travel times observed.

RF
&
DC

GPS
Antenna

RF

Power Injector

Isolator

Signal Attenuator

Combiner

T
T

u-blox

T

USRP

Interference Attenuator

Figure 6: The wired experiment circuit.

4.3 Monitoring Point Vehicle Identiﬁcation

The formulation of the peak detection zone and record-
ing time zone equip our system to derive a new approach
that can automatically identify the transmitting vehicle by
exploiting the camera visualization. When a single monitor-
ing point with a roadside detector and a monitoring camera
is available, the moment tm when the detector ﬁnds the in-
terference signals having the maximum value is utilized to
check the video captured by the monitoring camera. And
the peak detection zone is applied to capture all the candi-
date vehicles. We show in the next Section that we ﬁnd over
95% of our experiments in real-road scenarios capture only
one candidate vehicle inside the peak detection zone.

In low traﬃc conditions, using single monitoring point can
identify transmitting vehicles with high conﬁdence, because
in most of the cases there is only one transmitting vehicle in
both the peak detection zone and the recording time zone.
However, if the traﬃc is heavy, multiple candidate vehicles
could be captured by either the peak detection zone or the
recording time zone. By using our low-cost solution, our sys-
tem can employ multiple monitoring points separated along
the major roads having high traﬃc volume to still uniquely
identify the transmitting vehicle. The intuition behind this
is that with two or more monitoring points along the same
direction of the major roads, it is less likely for a trans-
mitting vehicle to have the exact same neighboring vehicles
inside of either the peak detection zone or the recording time
zone when crossing diﬀerent monitoring points.

Thus, the multiple monitoring points identiﬁcation algo-

rithm is separated into 2 steps:

Step 1: Collect Images of Candidate Vehicles from
Monitoring Points. Assume the transmitting vehicle pass-
ing K monitoring points on the road, the cameras at these
monitoring points are all triggered to record the videos when
the transmitting vehicle passing by. Therefore, each moni-
toring point generates the images of candidate vehicles (in-
cluding the transmitting vehicle) from the recorded videos,
denoted as Rk = {rk
1 , . . . , rk
m}, where k = 1, . . . , K is the in-
dex of monitoring points, rk
m is the images of mth candidate
vehicles captured at the kth monitoring point. All Rk are
transmitted to a central server. We note that this step is also
valid if the transmitting vehicle passing the same monitoring
point for K times in one day or diﬀerent days, similarly, Rk
from the same monitoring point will be transmitted to the
central server.

Step 2: Cross Validate Candidate Vehicles. Once
the central server receives the sets of vehicle’s image Rk from
all monitoring point cameras, it ﬁnds the common vehicle
C that appears in all Rk by calculating the C = R1 ∩ R2 ∩
. . . ∩ RK .

5. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we evaluate the two most important com-
ponents in the designed system: Carrier-to-Noise (C/N0)

627 

Satellite 12
Satellite 14
Satellite 18
Satellite 22
Satellite 25

50

40

30

20

10

)

B
d
(

N
C

/

0

0

 

−100

−90

−80

−60
Interference Power(dBm)

−70

−50

(a)

)

B
d
(

N
C

/

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

 

0
0

 

Satellite 12
Satellite 14
Satellite 18
Satellite 22
Satellite 25

50

100

Time(sec)

150

(b)

Figure 7: Result of cable experiments where (a) shows
C/N0 levels of satellites for diﬀerent interference power lev-
els, and (b) shows C/N0 levels of satellites when GPS re-
ceiver lost location ﬁx.

proﬁling based detection in both static and mobile cases,
and source vehicle identiﬁcation leveraging energy detection
through roadside monitoring. Such performance evaluation
provides fundamental insights to a complete system imple-
mentation for GPS interference detection.

5.1 Stationary Carrier-to-Noise Proﬁling and

Interference Tests

To gain a deeper understanding of the eﬀect of an jam-
ming signal on SNR levels of GPS receivers, we conducted
the following experiments. To comply with federal regula-
tions and to minimize possible interference to GPS systems,
we created a wired testbed depicted in Figure 6.
In this
setup, a jamming signal created by a USRP N210 software
deﬁned radio is combined with GPS satellite signals from
an external antenna and fed into a u-blox EVK-7N GPS re-
ceiver [27]. We used an isolator to ensure that the jamming
signal is not transmitted by the GPS antenna. In addition,
we utilized a high gain (40dB) GPS antenna with attenua-
tors to adjust the SNR of the received GPS signals. Using
this setup, we ﬁrst analyze the SNR patterns of diﬀerent
satellites with a 10 hour experiment.
In this test, we did
not use any attenuation to be able to observe the natural
SNR behaviour of satellites. The result of our detection al-
gorithm is depicted in Table 1 as the stationary case. Then
by using this setup, we analyze the impacts of interference
power on diﬀerent satellites. As shown in Figure 7(a), in-
creasing interference power results in a linear decrease of
SNR with increased noise. This result veriﬁes the expected
eﬀect of interference on the SNR readings.

We also observe that when a GPS receiver loses a location
ﬁx due to high-energy interference it sometimes still can re-
ceive data from some satellites, at least for part of the time.
We show the SNR level of several satellites over time at an
interference level of −45dBm in Figure 7(b) where the GPS
receiver has lost the location ﬁx. We can observe high vari-
ance in several satellites under this high level of interference,
an eﬀect that we have not observed under any of our non-
interference tests—both in this wired setup and the vehicle
experiments described later. This pattern can therefore be
a further indicator for interference.

5.2 Mobile Detectors for Carrier-to-Noise Pro-

ﬁling

We study the performance of mobile detectors leveraging
mobile devices (e.g., smartphone and GPS receiver) placed
inside of vehicles. Speciﬁcally, we examine the detection rate
and false positive rate under various interference powers and
the behavior of SNR changes across diﬀerent mobile devices
over repeated road trips.

0

)

B
d
(

/

 

N
C
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

60

50

40

30

20

10

 

0
0

 

)

0

B
d
(

/

N
C
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

Trip 1
Trip 2
Trip 3
Trip 4

15

5
10
Distance(km)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0

100

200

300

Distance interval number

400

500

600

700

(a) Average C/N0

(b) Combined C/N0

Figure 8: C/N0 proﬁle construction: (a) shows average
C/N0 for diﬀerent trips for a route and (b) shows the con-
structed C/N0 proﬁle the route.

5.2.1 Experimental Setup

Hardware and Signals. We conduct our experiments
in two routes in two US cities.
In the ﬁrst city, we use 1
HTC Evo 4G phone, 1 LG Nexus 4 phone, and 1 u-blox
EVK-7N GPS receiver. We use 1 LG Nexus 4 phone in
the second city. During the experiments, smartphones are
located on the front panel of the car and GPS antenna for
u-blox receiver is placed on top of the car.

Real Road Scenarios. We chose a suburban highway
for route 1 with a distance of 12 km which includes one
underpass and a city road for route 2 with a distance of
6 km. We drove our vehicle in regular traﬃc at diﬀerent
times of a day for 20 diﬀerent days over 4 weeks and use the
smartphones and the GPS receiver to record the GPS signal
for all trips. We split the distance into 20 meters long road
intervals which is relatively small and is long enough to get
several readings from receivers.

Metrics.

In this work, we utilize the mean value of 4
largest SNRs from all satellites, since GPS chips utilize the
4 strongest satellite signals to determine 3-D positions. In
the rest of the paper, SNR level corresponds to such a mean
value. We consider the case, where the SNR level reported
by a receiver is less than the threshold, as a detection when
the GPS jamming/interference is present. Based on this,
we evaluate the performance of the detection algorithms in
terms of following metrics: 1) detection rate (DR) is the
percentage of distance intervals in which the detection is
successful. For instance, in our route 1 experiment, there
are 610 diﬀerent road intervals (i.e 610 * 20 meters = 12.2
km), and if the detection is successful in x of them, then the
detection rate becomes (x * 100 / 610) %. 2) False positive is
the case when our algorithm determines there is a suspicious
GPS interference activity although it is not coming from a
jammer. We note that the detectable interference power is
deﬁned as the level where detection rate exceeds 95%.

5.2.2 Experimental Results

Feasibility Study of Proﬁle Construction. Figure 8
shows the average C/N0 over 4 days (each trip represents one
day) versus the relative distances from the starting points
of the trips in two cities. We observe that the C/N0 levels
are consistent at same locations across diﬀerent days. For
instance, there is always a big drop in C/N0 at about 6 km in
Figure 8(a) which is caused by an underpass during the road
trip. We note that the C/N0 level in smartphones ﬂuctuate
more than that in the GPS receiver.

To further illustrate the basic idea, a C/No proﬁle could
be constructed by combining the C/N0 values from all trips
across diﬀerent days into each corresponding distance inter-
val. The constructed C/N0 proﬁle of the testing route is
shown in Figure 8(b).

628 

100

 

100

%
e

 

t

a
R
n
o

 

i
t
c
e

t

e
D

80

60

40

20

0

 

m − 2*σ
m − 3*σ
m − 4*σ

 

m − 2*σ
m − 3*σ
m − 4*σ

%
e

 

t

a
R
n
o

 

i
t
c
e

t

e
D

80

60

40

20

0

−150 −130 −110

−70
Interference Power(dBm)

−90

−50

−150 −130 −110

−70
Interference Power(dBm)

−90

−50

(a) u-blox GPS receiver

(b) Smartphone

(a) 0 MPH (static)

(b) 50 MPH

Figure 9: Estimated detection rate of our detection algo-
rithm for diﬀerent interference powers.

Detection Performance. As we discussed in Section 3,
we can determine whether there are interference signals or
not by comparing the newly reported SNR to a ﬁxed thresh-
old. We present the detection rate of our algorithm under
diﬀerent interference power by varying the threshold lev-
els in Figure 9. In our proﬁling algorithm as presented in
Section 3, the threshold is deﬁned as δ = msnr − k ∗ σsnr.
We observe the detection rate increases with the increase of
received interference power. And the best detection rate
is achieved by using k=2. We further present the false
positive rate of our algorithm and detectable interference
power(DIP) under diﬀerent thresholds in Table 1. We ﬁnd
that low false positive rates are achieved under all cases,
indicating the eﬀectiveness of our approach.

The detection range is dependent on signal propagation
conditions. We therefore ﬁrst evaluate detection rate based
on the actual received interference power. We further study
how to decide on the distance of the jammer. From de-
tectable interference power results in Table 1, we know that
if the received power is -109 dBm, with 95 percentile pos-
sibility we can detect the jammer. By using the free space
path loss(FSPL) model with two propagation exponents 3
and 3.5, we observe the jamming activity could be detected
under the distance of 77 and 14 meters respectively.

5.3 Roadside Monitoring for Source Vehicle

Identiﬁcation

We next study the accuracy of source vehicle identiﬁcation
through roadside monitoring. To perform a representative
case study, in place of an actual jammer, we use a trans-
mitter with similar characteristics in the closest ISM band
at 900MHz. This is to minimize the chance of causing any
GPS interference. The shift to the 900MHz band primar-
ily means somewhat better material penetration and higher
antenna eﬀectiveness. This means that the range in the L1
band will be somewhat shorter, but we believe these 900MHz
results are suﬃciently close to be useful guidance.

5.3.1 Experimental Setup

Hardware and Signals. As described in section 3, we
conducted our experiments using USRP N210 at 915MHz
band to implement the energy-based interference detector
at each monitoring point. The USRPs were connected to
laptops streaming data to or from the host processors. A

k

2
3
4

DIP u-blox
stationary
-108 dBm
-105 dBm
-101 dBm

DIP u-blox
mobile
-103 dBm
-86 dBm
-55 dBm

DIP phone
mobile
-109 dBm
-91 dBm
-69 dBm

False Posi-
tive
5%
1%
0.1%

Table 1: Detectable Interference Power and False Positive
Rate for diﬀerent thresholds

Figure 10: Spectrogram of a jamming signal captured by
the jammer detector from the simulated jammer transmit-
ting jamming signal at 915 MHz.

video camera was setup with the USRP at the monitoring
point to record videos during the experiments with its time
synchronized with the laptop. Speciﬁcally, the camera is
on an adjacent overpass at each monitoring point, and an-
gled to capture the video of traﬃcs on all lanes within the
transmission range of the detector.

Real Road Scenarios. We chose a suburban highway
as a representative route, and placed two monitoring points
3 miles apart. The locations were chosen to reﬂect diﬀer-
ent lane/road conﬁgurations and based on the availability of
overpasses for camera placement as well as the availability
of safe roadside positions (a parking lot and bus stop). We
drove the vehicle carrying the transmitter on the right-most
and left-most lanes, and passed by the monitoring point for
20 times, respectively. The experiments were across diﬀerent
days with regular traﬃc.

Metrics. We consider the number of candidate vehicles
that are in the detection area(s) at the time of detection. If
the number is one, and this is our transmitter vehicle, we
consider a detection successful. Based on this, we evaluate
the performance of our detection and identiﬁcation approach
in terms of the following metrics: 1) detection rate (DR): the
percentage of passes during which our transmitting vehicle
was correctly identiﬁed by our system, and 2) false detection:
when a vehicle that likely does not emit interference signals
is implicated by our system.

5.3.2 Experimental Results

Validation of the Emulated GPS Jammer To vali-
date this detection approach and ensure a suﬃcient detec-
tion range as well as robustness to high speeds we conducted
the following experiment.
In addition to the roadside de-
tector we used a second USRP with a Matlab generated
(Figure 2) interference signal to emulate a jammer. Both
were equipped with one omni-directional antenna [9] (824-
960 MHz).

Given that the simulated GPS jammer jams at the power
of -15 dBm, we were able to detect it 50 meters away, in-
dicting a good chance of detecting GPS jammers from a
roadside location. The spectrograms of the received signal
at diﬀerent speeds (Figure 10) shows that the chirp shape
of the jamming signal remains visible even if the speed is
50 MPH and the received signal strength remains similar at
diﬀerent speeds.

Single Monitoring Point Case. We ﬁrst consider a sin-
gle monitoring zone. Provided with the video images from
the time of signal detection, we manually identiﬁed the num-
ber of vehicles inside the detection zone and whether our
transmitter vehicle is among them. As shown in Fig. 11, at
monitoring point 1 there is only a single vehicle in the mon-
itoring zone in 13 out of the 20 passes and 2 to 3 vehicles

6294

3

2

1

s
r
a
c
 

i

t

e
a
d
d
n
a
c
 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

0
0

4

3

2

1

s
r
a
c
 

i

t

e
a
d
d
n
a
c
 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

0
0

s
r
a
c
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

4

3

2

1

0

−20
Time difference(sec)

20

0

100

75

50

25

)

%
(
e

t

a
r
 

n
o

i
t
c
e

t

e
D

0
0
Detection time interval(sec)

15

10

5

5

10

15

20

5

10

15

20

Trial number (one pass along test route)

Trial number (one pass along test route)

(a) Monitoring point 1

(b) Monitoring point 2

(a)

(b)

Figure 11: Number of candidate cars at a monitoring point
when jamming activity is detected.

are present in the remaining 7 trials. Our transmitter vehicle
was present during all 20 trials, this indicates our system did
not have any false positives and were able to uniquely iden-
tify the transmitting vehicle in 65% of the cases. When only
considering monitoring zone 2, a single vehicle was present
in 7 out of the 20 passes with 2 to 4 vehicles in the remaining
ones, yielding no false positives and a lower detection rate
of 35%. This is likely due to the larger number of lanes at
this location.

Multi-Monitoring Point Case. The detection rate can
be signiﬁcantly improved by combining the information col-
lected from both zones. In particular, in the 16 cases where
more than one car was inside the detection zone at either
monitoring point 1 or 2, we determined the intersection of
the candidate vehicle set from zone 1 and 2, as per the
cross validation method when multiple detection zones are
present. This resulted in only a single detected vehicle and a
correct identiﬁcation of our transmitter vehicle in all cases.
To investigate these aspects further, we determined the

time diﬀerence that has accumulated between cars that passed
monitoring zone 1 together when they arrived at monitoring
zone 2. Figure 12 (a) presents a histogram of this time diﬀer-
ence. Positive timing means it takes more time for a regular
vehicle to travel from monitoring point 1 to 2 than the trans-
mitting vehicle and vice versa. This time diﬀerence allows
us to judge how large detection zones can become before the
detection rate would fall. Our current detection areas could
be traversed in about 1-2 seconds at typical speeds. The his-
togram shows that only a detection zone taking more than
4 seconds to traverse (approximately 100m at 25m/s) would
start to yield failed detections.

Detection Zone Size and Detection Rate. The re-
lationship between detection zone size and detection rate is
further examined in Figure 12 (b). Here the detection time
interval represents a detection zone in the time domain (for
example, a 50m zone is approximately equivalent to 2s at
25m/s). When this interval is too short, the detection zone
may not include the transmitting vehicle and detection rate
is low. If it is too long, many other vehicles are also in the
detection area, which means unique vehicle identiﬁcation is
not possible and detection rate declines again. In our road-
way experiments, detection rate was optimized with a 3-4
second interval, achieving a detection rate of 100%.

Thus, to determine the detection zone size, we drove the
transmitting vehicle and passed by each monitoring point
20 times as mentioned in section 4. In each pass, when the
detector is triggered by the transmitting signal, our system
recorded the position of the transmitting car and marked
that position in a screenshot obtained from the camera as
can be seen in Figure 14. These positions let us empirically
create a detection zone which covers all of these positions.

Figure 12: (a) Time diﬀerence between the jamming ve-
hicle and other suspicious vehicles that are in the detection
areas at both monitoring points, (b) The change of detection
rate with the detection zone size.

Evolution of the Signal Through One Pass. When
we were passing by the monitoring point, the detector de-
tects several activities (10 ms long).
In Figure 15(a), we
present how the normalized amplitude of the signal is chang-
ing over time for three passes as an illustration. Finally,
Figure 15(b) presents the received power for each detected
signal with the duration of that signal together with a de-
tection threshold at monitoring point 1.
It is clear that
in the false detection cases, the durations of the incident
and the received power are much less than those in the cor-
rect detection cases. Similar observations are obtained from
monitoring point 2. Our detection algorithm gives perfect
results (precision 1) for both monitoring points.

5.3.3 Discussion

In our experiments, the distance between the monitor-
ing points is about 3 miles and there is no traﬃc light in
between. If the distance between the monitoring points is
shorter, then we expect to see more cars to travel together
and they would be seen in the monitoring points together. If
there are some traﬃc lights between the monitoring points,
it would force the drivers to move in the same groups and
the number of common cars in both monitoring points is
expected to be more than those in our case. Also driving
styles can eﬀect the results.

In the evaluation, we have not compared with compet-
ing solutions, because we are not aware of an approach that
can isolate mobile GPS jammers with the level of resources
that were at our disposal (we did not have access to the
FAA/FCC teams and contractors described in Newark Air-
port incident).

5.3.4 Passive Roadside Monitoring

We deployed our detection system in several locations
in two US cities for monitoring GPS L1 frequency band
(1575.42 MHz) passively on the roadside. We mainly use a
interference/jamming detector equipped with a multi-band
GPS antennas [17] to continuously monitor the GPS L1 fre-
quency (1575.42 MHz) band. The detector is tuned to log
any suspicious signal at the L1 band when its power exceeds
the pre-set threshold, which was -60dBm. The suspicious
signals are studied through oﬄine analysis.

To perform extensive roadside monitoring, we want to
identify the interfering GPS signals on public roadways. With
this purpose, we have selected several locations on three
kinds of roads: a major highway, one of the busiest toll
road, and an urban road for passive monitoring of GPS fre-
quency band. In total we monitored the roadways passively
for approximately 200 hours in the 5 locations in NJ and
South Carolina.

630)
c
e
s
(
 
s
e
m
T
g
n

 

i

i
l

e
v
a
r
T

50

40

30

20

10

500
100
Distance between two monitoring points (m)

400

200

300

(a)

(b)

(c)

60

50

40

30

20

10

)

 

B
d
(
R
N
S
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

 

0
0

 

Trip 1
Trip 2
Trip 3
Trip 4

15

5
10
Distance(km)

(d)

Figure 13: (a) Spectrogram of no jamming activity at location 1, (b) suspicious interference activities detected at location
2, (c) Travel time of vehicles for diﬀerent interval length, (d) HTC Evo phone for route 1.

Figure 14: Positions of the transmitter vehicle at the time
of maximum detection in monitoring point 1.

In the 200 hours monitoring at ﬁve monitoring points, we
detected two suspicious interference incident at the location
1 (on a busy toll road) and the location 2 (on an interstate
highway) respectively. As shown in Figure 13, there was
high energy at the L1 frequency band in both of the two
incidents.

We also emphasize that although, it is not clear if the
signals detected in passive monitoring are coming from a
real jammer, these results show that signiﬁcant interfer-
ence events happen in the L1 frequency band and even non-
jamming interference can cause problems.
6. DISCUSSION

System limitations for future jammers. Our goal
is to design a low-cost detection mechanism that can be
mass deployed in roadways, and thus our jamming detec-
tion mechanisms are designed to identify existing oﬀ-the-
shelf GPS jammers that continuously emit interference. Fu-
ture jammers that may emit the interference for a short pe-
riod of time could still be caught by the mobile detectors
(e.g smart phones) since they could still be reporting any
outages or SNR anomalies even the strength of the jamming
signals change over time. With such reports, the path of
the jammer car can be interpolated to cameras for identiﬁ-
cation. The probability that jammer would be detected by
a stationary monitoring point on a single pass is smaller but
after a suﬃcient number of passes (say, for a commuter),
detection would still be likely.

Opportunistic Crowdsourcing. While not every indi-
vidual user will be motivated to install our mobile detector
app for jammer detection, we envision that this mechanism
can still be deployed in police vehicles, public transit sys-
tems, delivery truck ﬂeets, etc. It could also become part
of future connected vehicle standards or be integrated in
smartphone platforms with careful energy management.

GPS Spooﬁng. Apart from GPS jamming, another se-

curity issue is GPS spoofing attacks, whereby attackers trans-
mit fake GPS signals to fool the GPS receivers[20]. Note
that GPS spooﬁng is outside the scope of this paper and
we focus on designing a practical solution for detecting GPS
jammers. Nevertheless, our method is complementary to
GPS spooﬁng detection strategies.

−45

−50

−55

)

m
B
d
(
r
e
w
o
P
 
d
e
v
e
c
e
R

i

 

−60
0

 

−40

)

m
B
d
(
r
e
w
o
P
d
e
v
e
c
e
R

 

i

−45

−50

−55

 

−60
0

Pass 1
Pass 2
Pass 3

40

10

30
Duration(msec)

20

 

Correct detections
False detections
Detection line

50

Duration(msec)

100

(a)
Figure 15:
(a) shows the change in received power over
time as the transmitting vehicle passing by the monitoring
point 1 and (b) shows correct detections and false detections
at the same monitoring point.

(b)

7. RELATED WORK

There are quite a few works analyzing the characteris-
tics of the GPS jammers available in the market and utiliz-
ing multiple static stations to detect and localize the jam-
mer. Bauernfeind et al. [2] proposes to mitigate the in-car
jammers by applying an inverse signal transformation [21].
Mitch et al. [16] propose a time diﬀerence of arrival (TDOA)
based method that can localize the GPS jammer with max-
imum error of 15 meters, which however requires the prior
knowledge of the jamming signal. Lindstrom et al. [14]
builds a network of low cost application-speciﬁc integrated
circuit (ASIC) front-end modules providing automatic gain
control (AGC) values to detect and localize the interference
sources in GNSS L1/E1 band with an error of 21 meters
on average. Similarly, Poncelet et al. [23, 3] can detect and
localize wide-band GNSS jammers based on TDOA mea-
surements with the accuracy of 20 meters.

Vehicular ad hoc networks are also being employed for
identifying and localizing GPS jammers. Bauernfeind et
al. [1] uses a Diﬀerences-of-Received-Signal-Strength (DRSS)-
based localization algorithm which requires at least signal
measurements from four vehicles for localization. Fontanella
et al.[10] further experimentally conﬁrms the potential for
using VENETs to locate in-car jammers. However, the as-
sumption of having vehicles all around the jammer is not
generally true and the estimation error is approximately 40
meters which is too high for automatic vehicle identiﬁcation.
In addition, Kramer et al. [13] recently proposes an Android
based approach which relies on relative position change be-
tween a smartphone user and a static GPS jammer to per-
form localization. Scott et al. [25] proposes a crowd-sourcing
approach to detect and localize the GPS jammer by exploit-
ing the AGC values from the GPS receiver, which requires
to incorporate the GPS jam-to-noise (J/N) ratio detector in
cell phones.

631Chronos Technology has two commercial devices [5][6] for
detecting and localizing GPS jammers in the L1 frequency
band. However, these devices can only detect jammer in
static scenarios and can only be used manually for a short
period of time. On the contrary, our solution is automatic,
can be deployed at roadsides and can detect jammer in dy-
namic mobile scenarios.

8. CONCLUSION

Several incidents caused by in-vehicle jamming devices
have illustrated their serious impact on the availability of
the navigation services in critical infrastructure. To monitor
and reduce the use of in-vehicle GPS jammers, we presented
a low-cost jammer identiﬁcation system that can be mass
deployed in roadways to automatically detect and identify
the vehicles with GPS jammers. Instead of covering all types
of possible jammers, our jamming detection mechanisms fo-
cuses on achieving wide geographical coverage against the
most prevalent oﬀ-the-shelf GPS jammers, which continu-
ously emit interference. The dedicated detectors, however,
could be extended for more sophisticated jamming signals.
The key components of the system are monitoring stations
(which are equipped with directional antennas and cameras)
and mobile detectors (e.g., smartphones). Using an oﬀ-the-
shelf software-deﬁned radio (USRP) to emulate GPS jam-
ming signals, we conducted a case study evaluation of our
system with multiple trial drives on local highways in 2 US
cities and found the monitoring stations eﬀective.

We also demonstrated that by constructing location-based
proﬁles of expected signals, our mobile detector component
can detect interfering signals based on measurements that
are readily available in most GPS receivers, including the
ones in smartphones.Thus, it is possible to detect jammers
via crowdsourcing. While not every individual user will be
motivated to install our mobile detector app, we envision
that this mechanism can be deployed in law enforcement
vehicles, public transit systems, etc. End users may also
volunteer to report data while using GPS navigation ser-
vices, and thus provide opportunistic crowdsourced data.
The positive results that are obtained when validating the
most important components of our solution, i.e., the Energy-
based monitoring point and the SNR-based mobile detector,
are promising. They indicate the validity of a full-ﬂedged
system that consists of a centralized vehicle identiﬁcation
component integrated with monitoring points and mobile
detectors.

9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This material is based in part upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant Nos. CNS-
0845896, CNS-1329939, CNS-0954020 and by the Army Re-
search Oﬃce under Grant No. W911NF-13-1-0288.

10. REFERENCES
[1] R. Bauernfeind et al. In-car jammer interference

detection in automotive gnss receivers and localization
by means of vehicular communication. In FISTS, 2011
IEEE Forum on, pages 376–381. IEEE, 2011.
[2] R. Bauernfeind et al. Analysis, Detection and

Mitigation of InCar GNSS Jammer Interference in
Intelligent Transport Systems. Deutsche Gesellschaft
f¨ur Luft-und Raumfahrt-Lilienthal-Oberth eV, 2013.
[3] J. Bhatti et al. Development and demonstration of a

tdoa-based gnss interference signal localization

system. In PLANS, 2012 IEEE/ION, pages 455–469.
IEEE, 2012.

[4] A. Chhabra. Testimony of Ashwini Chhabra, Deputy

Commissioner, Policy & Planning. NYC Taxi and
Limousine Commission, 2012.

[5] Chronos Technology. CTL3510 GPS Jammer Detector.

http://www.navtechgps.com/assets/1/7/CTL3510 DS.pdf.

[6] Chronos Technology. CTL3520 GPS Jammer Detector

& Locator. https://www.ettus.com.

[7] Chronos Technology Ltd. SENTINEL: GNSS SErvices

Needing Trust In Navigation, Electronics, Location.
http://www.gps-world.biz/index.php/sentinel-1157.

[8] Ettus Research. USRP N210. https://www.ettus.com.
[9] Ettus Research. VERT900. https://www.ettus.com.
[10] D. Fontanella et al. In-car gnss jammer localization

using vehicular ad-hoc networks. 5/6 2013.

[11] GNU Radio. http://www.gnuradio.org.
[12] http://ngsim-community.org/. Next Generation

SIMulation Community, 2013.

[13] I. Kramer et al. Android gps jammer localizer
application based on c/n0 measurements and
pedestrian dead reckoning. In ION-GNSS, 2012.

[14] J. Lindstrom et al. Gnss interference detection and

localization using a network of low-cost front-end
modules. In ION GNSS, 2007.

[15] Merrill, John. Patriot Watch Vigilance Safeguarding

America.
http://www.gps.gov/multimedia/presentations/2012
/03/WSTS/merrill.pdf.

[16] R. Mitch et al. Civilian gps jammer signal tracking

and geolocation. In ION GNSS, 2012.

[17] MobileMark Antenna Solutions. GPS Multiband

Antenna.

[18] M. A. Mutaz et al. Leveraging platoon dispersion for
sybil detection in vehicular networks. In PST. IEEE,
2013.

[19] National Transportation Library. Transit-Management

Systems. http://ntl.bts.gov
/lib/jpodocs/edldocs1/13480/ch6.pdf.

[20] T. Nighswander et al. Gps software attacks. In CCS.

ACM, 2012.

[21] X. Ouyang et al. Short-time fourier transform receiver

for nonstationary interference excision in direct
sequence spread spectrum communications. Signal
Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 49(4), 2001.

[22] J. D. Parsons and P. J. D. Parsons. The mobile radio

propagation channel. J. Wiley, 2000.

[23] J.-P. Poncelet et al. A low-cost monitoring station for
detection & localization of interference in gps l1 band.
In NAVITEC. IEEE, 2012.

[24] G. D. Rash. Gps jamming in a laboratory

environment. NAWCWPNS, pages 1–20, 1997.

[25] L. Scott. J 911: Fast jammer detection and location
using cell-phone crowd-sourcings. GPS World, 2010.

[26] E. N. Skomal et al. Measuring the radio frequency

environment. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1985.

[27] U-Blox. EVK-7N.

https://www.u-blox.com/en/evaluation-tools-a-
software/gps-evaluation-kits.html.

[28] C. VSCC. Vehicle safety communications project: task

3 ﬁnal report: identify intelligent vehicle safety
applications enabled by dsrc. 2005.

632