Understanding the Domain

Registration Behavior of Spammers

Shuang Hao
Georgia Tech

shao@cc.gatech.edu

Nick Feamster

Georgia Tech

feamster@cc.gatech.edu

Matthew Thomas

Verisign, Inc.

mthomas@verisign.com

Christian Kreibich
ICSI & Lastline, Inc.
christian@icir.org
Scott Hollenbeck

Verisign, Inc.

shollenbeck@verisign.com

Vern Paxson

ICSI & UC Berkeley

vern@cs.berkeley.edu

Chris Grier

ICSI & UC Berkeley

grier@cs.berkeley.edu

ABSTRACT
Spammers register a tremendous number of domains to evade
blacklisting and takedown efforts. Current techniques to detect
such domains rely on crawling spam URLs or monitoring lookup
trafﬁc. Such detection techniques are only effective after the spam-
mers have already launched their campaigns, and thus these coun-
termeasures may only come into play after the spammer has already
reaped signiﬁcant beneﬁts from the dissemination of large volumes
of spam. In this paper we examine the registration process of such
domains, with a particular eye towards features that might indicate
that a given domain likely has a malicious purpose at registration
time, before it is ever used for an attack. Our assessment includes
exploring the characteristics of registrars, domain life cycles, regis-
tration bursts, and naming patterns. By investigating zone changes
from the .com TLD over a 5-month period, we discover that spam-
mers employ bulk registration, that they often re-use domains pre-
viously registered by others, and that they tend to register and host
their domains over a small set of registrars. Our ﬁndings suggest
steps that registries or registrars could use to frustrate the efforts
of miscreants to acquire domains in bulk, ultimately reducing their
agility for mounting large-scale attacks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.3 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Network Oper-
ations—Network monitoring; K.6.5 [Security and Protection];
K.4.1 [Computers and Society]: Public Policy Issues—Abuse and
crime involving computers

General Terms
Measurement, Security

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IMC’13, October 23–25, 2013, Barcelona, Spain.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1953-9/13/10 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2504730.2504753.

Keywords
DNS; Domain Registration; Spam; Blacklist

1.

INTRODUCTION

Spammers and other miscreants often make heavy use of do-
mains registered in the DNS to direct victims to Web sites that host
scams, malware, and other malicious content. To mitigate these
threats, network operators employ blacklisting of domains, but the
rate at which new domains appear makes developing decisions suf-
ﬁciently quickly to blacklist domains particularly challenging. Ide-
ally, such decisions could be made at registration time rather than
at usage time, enabling “proactive blocking”. However, developing
registration-time decisions about which new domains will likely
see subsequent malicious employment appears quite daunting given
the very large rate at which new domains appear (tens of thou-
sands per day for .com). Instead, existing DNS reputation systems
use either evidence of malicious use (e.g., appearance of names in
a spam trap) or the characteristics of DNS lookup trafﬁc [1, 4].
Such systems generally must observe a signiﬁcant volume of DNS
lookups before determining the reputation to associate with a do-
main.

In this work we seek to understand the nature of spammer do-
main registrations with an ultimate goal of hampering the ease with
which attackers currently acquire large volumes of registered do-
mains. We do so by analyzing a range of registration-time fea-
tures as manifest in changes seen every 5 minutes to .com over
a 5-month period. For partial ground truth in assessing which of
these registrations reﬂected spammer activity, we draw upon do-
mains identiﬁed by several large blacklist feeds associated with
email spam campaigns.

Our study develops the following ﬁndings:
• We conﬁrm the earlier ﬁnding that only a handful of reg-
istrars account for the majority of spammer domains [18].
70% of spammer domains came from 10 registrars, though
these registrars accounted for only about 20% of all new do-
mains added to the zone. Thus, miscreants appear to prefer
those speciﬁc registrars, and positive actions from these reg-
istrars could have signiﬁcant impact in impeding the use of
large volumes of newly registered domains for spam activity.
• Groups of domains registered by a given registrar at a sin-
gle time exhibit two statistically distinct patterns. We show

63that groups of registrations very often follow a distribution
well-described by a compound Poisson process, but many
registrars also exhibit registration “spikes” that this process
would produce only with exceedingly low probability.

• Spammer domains occur in such “spikes” with much more
prevalence than in general (non-spike) registration activity.
This ﬁnding suggests that spammers ﬁnd economic and/or
management beneﬁt to registering domains in large batches,
and thus detection procedures that leverage the presence of
such spikes could force spammers to adopt less efﬁcient ap-
proaches for their registrations.

• Spammers frequently re-register expired domains that orig-
inally had a clean history. Presumably using such names
alleviates spammers of the burden of generating plausible-
looking names (though we also observe algorithmically gen-
erated names), providing textual diversity as well as a benign
past reputation that may aid in initially avoiding detection.

We hope these ﬁndings will ultimately lead to the development
of a detection procedure that can accurately identify names in-
tended for malicious use at time-of-registration rather than only
later at time-of-use.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. §2 intro-
duces the taxonomy and §3 surveys the related work. §4 describes
the datasets that we collected and used in our analysis. In §5 we
use the datasets to illuminate the beneﬁts of identifying spammer
domains at registration time. We then proceed with investigating
the prospects for doing so, starting in §6, which analyzes the distri-
bution of spammer and non-spammer domains across registrars and
DNS servers. §7 presents our ﬁndings regarding bulk registration
and our approach to identify registration spikes. §8 associates the
domain life cycle with registration to dissect spammers’ strategies
to acquire domains.

2. BACKGROUND: DNS REGISTRATION

PROCESS AND LIFE CYCLE

To set the context for our work, here we sketch the process by
which malicious parties (and others) register domains and the sub-
sequent life cycle regarding use of the domains.

Figure 1 shows the domain registration process. There are three
roles in the ﬁgure: registrants (domain registration applicants), reg-
istrars (e.g., GoDaddy), registries (e.g., Verisign). Registries are
responsible for managing the registration of domain names within
the top-level domains (TLDs) and generating the zone ﬁles that list
domain names and their authoritative nameservers. For example,
Verisign serves as the registrar for .com, CNNIC for .cn, and
DENIC for .de [32]. In this work we focus on .com, the largest
TLD [30], which has long reﬂected a major target abused by mis-
creants for spamming activities [27].

ICANN accredits registrars, which contract with TLD registries
to provide registration service to the public. Presently around 900
registrars exist across all TLDs, the bulk of which serve .com (and
often other TLDs) [25]. A registrant selects a designated registrar
to register a domain. The designated registrar in turn connects to
the registry’s SRS (Shared Registration System) via EPP (Extensi-
ble Provisioning Protocol, RFC5730 [14]) or RRP (Registry Reg-
istrar Protocol, RFC3632 [13]) to manage the zones. The registry
updates the corresponding DNS zone information in the database
and uses RZU (Rapid Zone Update) to add the DNS information
in the top-level domain nameservers. Domain registration operates
in a real-time fashion, resulting in only a short interval between
registration requests and domains becoming active in the zone.

Figure 1: Process of second-level domain registration.

Figure 2 indicates the life cycle of a second-level domain in the
.com zone. We show only a simpliﬁed cycle; see ICANN’s reg-
istry agreements [15] for a full description of the possible states
of a domain. In order to obtain a domain, registrants need to se-
lect available domain names that are not registered and in use. The
registration term usually ranges from 1 year to 10 years. If the reg-
istrant chooses to renew a domain, the expiration date will be ex-
tended and the domain remains in the zone ﬁles. The renewal could
occur at any time during the registration period, the Auto-Renew
Grace Period (for domains the registrar has already marked for re-
newal) and the Redemption Grace Period (for domains marked for
deletion). If the registrant chooses not to renew, the domain ex-
pires, gets removed from the zone and becomes available for others
to register. Two special periods mark the beginning and end of a do-
main’s life cycle. The 5-day Add Grace Period begins immediately
after domain registration, allowing the registrant to change their
mind, undo the registration, and receive full credit for the registra-
tion fee [16]. To limit domain tasting abuse, i.e., taking advantage
of no-cost trial periods for domains, registrars limit the number of
registrations a registrant may revert per month. The domain enters a
5-day Pending Delete Period that prevents further alterations to the
domain’s status before it gets unregistered and becomes available
for re-registration [29, 22]. We explore how this life cycle relates
to the registration of spammer domains in §8.

3. RELATED WORK

DNS Resolution. Most previous DNS-based detection studies have
focused on analyzing lookup trafﬁc. These studies date back many
years to work performed by Danzig et al. [6] and Jung et al. [17],
both of which examined lookup behavior from the vantage point
of lookups produced by individual sites. Notos [1] and EXPO-
SURE [4] leverage DNS lookup behavior within a local network to
formulate reputations associated with domains. Kopis monitors the
trafﬁc to authoritative nameservers and top-level domain servers to
achieve global visibility to detect abnormal activities [2]. Our pre-
vious work actively probed the DNS records and studied the lookup
trafﬁc of second-level domains after their registration to charac-
terize those associated with Internet attacks [12]. In contrast, our

RegistrantRSRSRegistryTop-level NameserversADDRZURZURZURegistrarDatabase64Figure 2: Life cycle of a second-level domain.

work here analyzes the registration patterns of spammer domains
to illuminate potential opportunities for early detection of spammer
domains.

Registrars and Registration. Several lines of recent work have
examined the roles of registrars and registries. Coull et al. stud-
ied the registration abuse phenomenon, including domain-name
speculation, tasting, and front-running (where registrars abuse in-
sider information to obtain a domain, thus locking out other reg-
istrars) [5]. Liu et al. investigated the effect of registry policy
changes and registrar actions taken to terminate domains used by
illicit on-line pharmacies [19], ﬁnding domain pricing and domain
takedowns to have at least temporary deterring effect. Felegyhazi
et al. inferred groups of malicious domains based on the DNS
servers and daily registration concurrency associated with known-
bad seed domains [10]. While closest to the theme of our work,
their approach’s need to identify such seeds complicates its appli-
cation at registration time. In addition, we provide a signiﬁcantly
more granular analysis (5-minute zone changes, modeling the reg-
istration process of individual registrars, statistical identiﬁcation of
“spikes”), and data broader in scope (non-spam registrations vs.
spam registrations, domain life cycle, naming patterns).

Domain Generation Algorithms. In an effort to resist takedown
of centralized command and control (C&C) servers, recent botnets
such as Conﬁcker, Kraken and Bobax have used domain genera-
tion algorithms (DGAs) to query a set of domains. The botmaster
needs to only register one domain of the set to enable bots to access
the C&C server. Yadav et al.studied different metrics to identify
botnets by ﬁnding randomly generated domain names [31]. Anton-
akakis et al. developed clustering techniques to discover new DGA
variants and compromised hosts [3]. Unlike these works, we ex-
amine the domain names as actually registered in the .com TLD
in an attempt to identify lexical patterns distinguishing spammer
domains.

4. DATA COLLECTION

In this section we describe the datasets used in our analysis,
which we summarize in Table 1. Our primary dataset consists of
changes made to the .com zone every ﬁve minutes for a 5-month
period, March–July 2012. In addition, we interpret the signiﬁcance
(i.e., spammer or otherwise) of new registrations in .com based
on any subsequent appearance of a given domain in either a “spam
trap” we operate or a well-known blacklist. We term a newly reg-
istered domain that appears in either the spam trap or on one of the
blacklists as a spammer domain, and a domain that does not as a
non-spammer domain.

Domain Registration. Verisign operates the .com zone under
contract to ICANN. Changes to the zone appear in Domain Name
Zone Alert (DNZA) ﬁles, which indicate (1) the addition of new

Collection period
March–July 2012

Data
DNZA
Spam trap March–October 2012
URIBL
March–October 2012
August–October 2012
SURBL

Update

granularity
5 minutes
real time
hourly
hourly

.com
domains
12,824,401
65,298
149,555
490,439

Table 1: Summary of data feeds.

domains, (2) the removal of existing domains, and (3) changes to
existing domains in terms of revisions to their associated name-
servers. Our data includes captures of the DNZA ﬁles as recorded
every ﬁve minutes, time periods we refer to as epochs.

Registrars and History. Domain registrations must be executed
by an ICANN-accredited registrar chosen by the user registering
the domain (the “registrant”). The registrant pays the registrar a fee
for this service. In general, we have no visibility into the registrants
associated with particular domains (sometimes WHOIS information
provides their identities, but numerous registrars provide a “private
registration” service that masks this information). One can how-
ever obtain information about a given domain’s registrar based on
WHOIS information, or using third-party services such as Domain-
Tools [8]. Thus, we can only attempt to tease out the registration
behavior of individual users as inferable from the registration ac-
tivities of individual registrars.

A given domain added to the zone might reﬂect either a ﬁrst-time
registration or a re-registration of a previously registered domain.
We can distinguish these two based on historical WHOIS informa-
tion; for re-registered domains, we can obtain when the domain was
previously deleted from the zone [28].

Identifying Spammer Domains. In general we would like to asso-
ciate with domains a label indicating whether an attacker registered
the domain for spamming purposes. Since we lack comprehensive
ground truth regarding the ultimate use of domains, to this end we
use two proxies: subsequent appearance of a newly registered do-
main in: (1) an email spam campaign, or (2) a domain blacklist.

For the ﬁrst of these, we operated a spam trap, i.e., our own do-
main with an associated mail server that has no legitimate email
addresses. We can conﬁdently consider all emails sent to the spam
trap as spam. Although the spam contains non-spam related do-
mains (e.g., youtube.com), by restricting our focus to domains
recently registered (March–July 2012) we can ﬁlter down the do-
mains appearing in the spam trap to those very likely used for spam-
ming.

For the second, we subscribed to three major DNS blacklists,
URIBL, SURBL, and Spamhaus DBL. During our subsequent anal-
ysis we found strong indications that the Spamhaus DBL very

RegisteredAddGracePeriod(5 days)Pending Delete (5 days)ExpiredRenewAvailableReleased(Available)Re-registrationRedemption Grace Period (30 days)(110 years)Auto-Renew Grace Period (45 days)65March 2012
April 2012
May 2012
June 2012
July 2012
Registrations over 5 months

New domains
2,832,867
2,596,192
2,641,466
2,383,010
2,389,636
12,824,401

Subset of new domains
appearing in spam trap
6,072
3,970
4,091
2,861
2,958
19,930

Subset of new domains
appearing in URIBL
12,572
12,111
10,726
8,651
8,875
52,857

Subset of new domains
appearing in SURBL
18,875
21,824
21,616
21,872
29,525
113,358

Subset of new domains appearing
in spam messages or blacklists
24,458
27,300
25,936
24,763
32,394
134,455

Table 2: Monthly data statistics.

likely uses registration-time features to establish the reputation of
a domain (see the discussion in §5.3). Given that, then since part
of our focus is to assess to what degree registration-time features
correlate with a domain’s subsequent employment in an abusive
context, for our purposes we cannot soundly use a domain’s pres-
ence on the Spamhaus DBL as such an indicator. Consequently,
we omit this source from our analysis other than to demonstrate the
indicators that it uses such features for blacklisting.

Summary of Data. Table 2 shows the number of second-level
.com domains registered in each month, and the subset of those
registrations that later appeared in either our spam trap or on one of
the two blacklists. Of the 12,824,401 second-level domains regis-
tered in the .com zone over ﬁve months, 134,455 reﬂect spammer
domains.

5. LONGEVITY OF SPAMMER DOMAINS
In this section we look at several facets of the time periods over
which spammers employ their domains: the age of domains (time
since registration) when they appear on blacklists or in spam cam-
paigns; the amount of time during which domains continue to see
use once spammers begin to employ them; and the amount of time
between a recent registration of a spammer domain and its subse-
quent appearance. Our examination shows that detecting spammer
domains at the time of their registration can offer signiﬁcant advan-
tages.
5.1 Age of Domains Used for Spamming

We ﬁrst consider the degree to which spammers employ rel-
atively “fresh” (recently registered) domains in their spam cam-
paigns. If spammers primarily rely upon long-lived domains, then
we cannot hope to gain much beneﬁt from disrupting the registra-
tion of new spammer domains.

Figure 3 shows the distribution of the amount of time elapsed
between the registration of a given .com spammer domain and its
appearance in either the URIBL blacklist or our spam trap. (We
omit results for SURBL because we lack sufﬁciently long data
from it to compute a comparable distribution.) In particular, for
all .com domains that appeared in either URIBL or our spam trap
from March–July 2012, we determine the domain’s date of reg-
istration, and plot the difference between that time and the ﬁrst
such appearance. Overall, 35–40% of the domains were registered
within the past 30 days, and 40–50% within 60 days.
(In addi-
tion, since listings in URIBL will likely lag behind actual use, and
the spam trap will include some long-lived benign domains such as
google.com, the age of actual spammer domains at time of ﬁrst
use will skew somewhat lower than these ﬁgures.)

Because domain registrations represent a direct cost for spam-
mers, the fact that spammers frequently employ domains registered
quite recently (within a few months) indicates that they have an on-
going need to acquire new domains. Thus, if we impair their reg-

Figure 3: Distribution of days between domain registration and
appearance of a .com domain in either our spam trap (red) or
URIBL (blue).

istration activities, we can add friction to their general enterprise.
In addition, given the quantity of domains that spammers use, we
would expect that their need to continually acquire new domains
will incline them towards registering new domains in batches, a
feature that we analyze in §7.1.
5.2 Duration-of-Use in Spam Campaigns

Another facet of spammer domain longevity concerns for how
long a spammer uses a given domain. If domains see only brief
periods of use, then activity-based blacklisting will fail to effec-
tively block the spammer’s fruitful employment of a domain unless
the blacklisting occurs very soon after the onset of use. If so, then
the beneﬁts of identifying spammer domains prior to use, such as
at-time-of-registration, rise.

We can assess duration-of-use from our spam trap data, and in-
deed we ﬁnd that more than 60% of the .com domains observed in
the spam trap appear during only a single day (75% for ≤ 10 days,
and only 5% for ≥ 60 days). This “single-shot” nature of most of
the spammer domains complicates blacklisting efforts—though it
also may reﬂect the efﬁcacy of such efforts at narrowing the win-
dow during which spammers can proﬁtably use their domains—and
highlights the beneﬁt of at-time-of-registration detection.
5.3 Lifetime of Recently Registered Domains
Finally, we examine the use by spammers of newly registered
domains given that we ﬂagged it as a spammer domain (and thus
it necessarily appeared in our spam trap, or in one of our black-

03060901201501802102402703003303603900102030405060708090100Days between registration and appearanceCumulative % of all spammer domains  spam trapURIBL66Figure 4: Distribution of days between domain registration and
appearance of a newly registered .com domain in either our spam
trap, URIBL, or the Spamhaus blacklist.

lists, during the coming months). Figure 4 shows the distribution
of the time between the registration of such spammer domains and
their appearance in our spam trap or in a blacklist.1 We see that
a number of days may pass after registration prior to the domain’s
appearance. This delay again indicates we might gain signiﬁcant
beneﬁt from identifying spammer domains at the time of registra-
tion, before any activity takes place.

The ﬁgure also shows the delay between registration and black-
listing for the Spamhaus DBL. We observed that Spamhaus black-
lists domains much earlier than URIBL—or even than the appear-
ance of the domain in our spam trap. We conﬁrmed with Spamhaus
that they base their DBL entries in part on information gathered
at registration time to facilitate more proactive blacklisting. Be-
cause Spamhaus uses registration-time features to construct their
blacklist, the presence of a Spamhaus domain in a blacklist does
not provide independent evidence that features we consider for at-
registration-time detection indeed will have power for identifying
spammer domains. Given this lack of independence, we refrain
from further analysis treating the appearance of a domain on the
Spamhaus blacklist as separate conﬁrmation of the domain as one
employed by spammers.

Finally, we examine the extent to which any particular blacklist
covers the full set of spammer domains, and the extent to which
these blacklists overlap with one another. Figure 5 shows the in-
tersection of spammer domains registered from March–July 2012,
based on the information from our spam trap, and from URIBL and
SURBL. We observe that each data source identiﬁed many spam-
mer domains that did not appear in the other information sources.
This lack of overlap presumably indicates that different blacklist
sources use different criteria to determine whether to include a do-
main in its blacklist.

1It is important to keep in mind the distinction between Figure 3
and Figure 4. The former is conditioned on any domain appearing
in either the spam trap or the blacklist during the ﬁve-month period;
the latter is conditioned on the appearance of any domain registered
during the ﬁve-month period.

Figure 5: Venn diagram of spammer domains for different identiﬁ-
cation methods.

6. SPAM DOMAIN INFRASTRUCTURE

In this section we brieﬂy look at the infrastructure supporting in-
dividual spammer domain registrations: the registrars used to reg-
ister these domains, the DNS servers initially selected to resolve
the domains, and how this infrastructure compares with that used
for non-spammer domains. Our analysis supports the following:

• Nearly 70% of spammer domains originated from 10 regis-
trars, while those registrars accounted for only 20% of all
newly registered domains over the 5 months of our data.
• Spammer domains primarily use the regular authoritative
DNS servers operated by the registrar, at least initially. This
ﬁnding suggests that efforts to proactively blacklist spammer
domains should focus on registrar-level analysis rather than
DNS-server analysis.

We now develop these ﬁndings in more detail.
6.1 Registrars Used for Spammer Domains

We ﬁrst examine the proportion of registrations at each registrar
that correspond to spammer domains and how this proportion varies
by registrar. Table 3 shows the registrars, ranked by the number of
spammer domains that they registered over the ﬁve-month period
of our study (shown in the second column); the third column shows
the percentage of known spammer domains registered by that reg-
istrar. The fourth column indicates the cumulative percentage of
spammer domains for the top registrars. Interestingly, 46% of the
spammer domains correspond to just two registrars. This statis-
tic implies that the positive actions from a small set of registrars
might signiﬁcantly frustrate the use of newly registered spammer
domains. We treated GoDaddy separately because it manages sig-
niﬁcantly more domains than other registrars; hence, even though
it registers a signiﬁcant number of spammer domains, the number
of spammer domains that it registers remains a small fraction of the
total number of domains that it registers.

Our ﬁndings agree with a similar study by Levchenko et al. [18],
and also with an independent study that ranks the registrars serv-
ing rogue Internet pharmacies [24].
Indeed, three registrars—
Moniker, Tucows and Bizcn.com, Inc.—appeared in both
studies as top-ten registrars for spammer domains.

Next, we explore how the registrars compare, in terms of the
number of spammer and non-spammer domains that they regis-
ter. Figure 6 shows the number of spammer and non-spammer do-
mains that each registrar registered over the course of our study;
each dot represents a registrar. Dots above the diagonal show reg-
istrars that registered more non-spammer domains than spammer

  0    10    20    30    40    50    60    70    80    90   1000102030405060708090100Days between registration and appearanceCumulative % of new spammer domains  spam trapURIBLSpamhausSURBLURISpam trap77,95113,9862,33611,5081,3114,77522,58867Registrar
eNom, Inc.
Moniker Online Services, Inc.
Tucows.com Co.
INTERNET.bs Corp.
Bizcn.com, Inc.
Trunkoz Technologies Pvt Ltd. d/b/a OwnRegistrar.com
PDR Ltd. d/b/a PublicDomainRegistry.com
OnlineNIC, Inc.
Center of Ukrainian Internet Names
Register.com, Inc.
GoDaddy.com, LLC

Number
36,245
25,488
5,996
5,786
5,638
4,577
3,595
2,857
2,781
2,540
5,532

Spammer domains
Percentage
27.03
19.01
4.47
4.32
4.21
3.41
2.68
2.13
2.07
1.89
4.13

Cumulative pct.
27.03
46.05
50.52
54.83
59.04
62.45
65.13
67.26
69.33
71.22
75.35

All registered domains

Percentage
7.62
0.67
6.28
0.70
0.70
0.05
3.08
0.70
0.06
2.18
30.75

Cumulative pct.
7.62
8.30
14.57
15.27
15.97
16.02
19.10
19.80
19.86
22.04
53.79

Table 3: The 10 registrars that registered the greatest number of spammer domains.

APIs that allow users to manipulate the domain zone entries, and
Moniker allows up to 500 domain registrations at a time.
6.2 Authoritative Nameservers

The zone updates we use for our study include NS records as-
sociated with each new domain. During March–July 2012, we
observed 12,824,401 newly registered .com domains, but only
242,790 authoritative DNS servers assigned to those domains. We
thought that we might ﬁnd that spammer domains are dispropor-
tionately hosted on certain sets of authoritative DNS servers, which
we assessed using three metrics:

Figure 6: Counts of spammer versus non-spammer domains on the
registrars.

ones, and dots below the diagonal line reﬂect a ratio towards higher
spammer domain registrations than non-spammer. The ﬁgure la-
bels the top registrars for spammer domains, and shows that 19 of
the 919 registrars in our study registered more than 1,000 spam-
mer domains. We see that spammers often use popular registrars
to register spammer domains, perhaps because doing so may make
it more difﬁcult to identify spammer domains solely based on the
registrar. On the other hand, for some registrars that do not register
many domains, their fraction of spammer domains can be strikingly
high (ABSystems, in particular 2).

We speculate that the decisions by spammers regarding domain
registrations are driven by both economic concerns (price of regis-
tration) as well as the ease of managing multiple domain registra-
tions. Regarding the ﬁrst of these, we note that registrars charge
a range of fees. For example, eNom sets special prices for re-
sellers, GoDaddy offers cheaper prices for bulk registration, and
INTERNET.bs provides free private WHOIS protection. The man-
agement features that each registrar provides determine how eas-
ily a customer can manage a domain; for example, eNom provides

2The badness of ABSystems comes as no surprise. This regis-
trar effectively acts as the DNS infrastructure division of a large
spamming operation known as “Quick Cart Pro.”

• Toxicity: The percentage of domains that a nameserver hosts
that are spammer domains. This metric represents the ex-
tent to which an authoritative nameserver sees use mainly in
support of spamming activity. A toxicity of 100% indicates
that the nameservers appear to operate solely under miscre-
ant control; the presence of such nameservers in a new do-
main registration could effectively identify new spammer do-
mains.

• Duplication: Owners of a given domain typically use mul-
tiple DNS servers to host the same domain to achieve re-
dundancy in case of failure [20]. Intuitively, a group of do-
mains hosted by the same set of authoritative nameservers
likely have some relationship. We compute the Jaccard index
to measure the similarity of the authoritative nameservers in
terms of the domains they host. Suppose there exist N name-
servers, each of which hosts a set of domains Di. We com-
pute |∩N
i=1 Di|. A higher Jaccard index for a pair
of nameservers indicates a high overlap in terms of the set
of domains that those nameservers resolve. This association
may ultimately help with identifying groups of nameservers
commonly used to host spammer domains.

i=1 Di|/|∪N

• Association: The percentage of domains hosted on a name-
server that belong to a particular registrar. We deﬁne the reg-
istrar with the highest association score for a nameserver as
the primary registrar for that nameserver.

Figure 7 shows the cumulative distribution of spammer domains
over the DNS servers. The X-axis shows the indexes of DNS
servers ordered by their toxicity; 8,543 of 242,790 DNS servers
hosted spammer domains. The ﬁgure has two Y axes. The blue
dashed curve shows the toxicity of each DNS server and corre-
sponds to the Y -axis on the left side. The red solid curve shows the
cumulative percentage of spammer domains for the set of name-
servers ranked by their toxicity, and maps to the Y -axis values on
the right side of the plot. The nameservers hosting only spammer

   0  10 100100010^410^510^610^7   0  10 100100010^410^510^610^7Non−spammer domain counts (log scale)Spammer domain counts (log scale)Moniker OnlineServices, Inc.GoDaddy.com, LLC ABSystems IncINTERNET.bs Corp.Tucows.com Co.Bizcn.com, Inc.Trunkoz TechnologiesPvt Ltd. d/b/aOwnRegistrar.comOnlineNIC, Inc.eNom, Inc.Center ofUkrainianInternet NamesPDRLtd. d/b/aPublicDomainRegistry.comRegister.com, Inc.68DNS server
ns[1,2].monikerdns.net
ns[3,4].monikerdns.net
dns[1-5].name-services.com
dns[1-5].registrar-servers.com
ns[1,2].google.com†

Common spammer domains
21,256
17,012
16,955
11,016
5,957

ns[1,2].directionﬁndfree.com
ns[1,2].speee.jp
ns[1-4].name.com
ns0[7,8].domaincontrol.com
ns[3,4].cnmsn.com

5,302
2,400
1,345
1,089
1,047

Toxicity
38.46
33.74
6.75
4.58
93.99

5.55
37.94
1.52
0.17
24.89

Jaccard index

Primary registrar

1.00 Moniker Online Services, Inc.
1.00 Moniker Online Services, Inc.
0.97
0.99
0.99

eNom, Inc.
eNom, Inc.
Trunkoz Technologies Pvt Ltd. d/b/a Own-
Registrar.com
1.00
Tucows.com Co.
1.00 OnlineNIC, Inc.
0.96 Name.com LLC
1.00 GoDaddy.com, LLC
0.99

Bizcn.com, Inc.

Assoc. %
99.77
99.75
99.88
99.86
19.90

82.00
98.70
99.76
95.35
99.38

Table 4: Top nameservers hosting spammer domains. †Note: the domains registered on ns1.google.com and ns2.google.com migrated to
other DNS servers immediately after registration.

7. DETECTING REGISTRATION SPIKES
In this section we examine the extent to which spammers regis-
ter domains in abnormally large batches (“spikes”). We ﬁrst present
evidence that suggests that domains associated with spamming are
registered in groups. We then show that the number of domains
that a given registrar registers in a given ﬁve-minute interval usu-
ally follows a distribution well-modeled by a compound Poisson
process—but that many registrars also exhibit registration spikes
that this process would produce only with exceedingly low proba-
bility. From this we conclude that these spikes represent a different
underlying process than that corresponding to routine activity.

After deriving a model to explain both normal and anoma-
lous registration activity, we show that spammers tend to regis-
ter batches of domains in such spikes more often than do non-
spammers. Our results suggest that methods to reliably identify
registration spikes can serve as a useful feature for proactively de-
tecting names that are subsequently used in spam campaigns.
7.1 Bulk Registrations by Spammers

Spammers acquire large volumes of domains to remain agile
when conducting their operations [18]. We frequently observe
spammer domains registered in spikes as large as hundreds of do-
mains within a single ﬁve-minute .com update. We speculate that
such registration behavior occurs due to: (1) convenience; (2) bulk
pricing from registrars [11, 21]; or (3) the use of stolen credit cards
to purchase a large number of domains in a short period of time,
since the fraudulent purchases will trigger detection and result in
voiding of the stolen credit card.

We use the term bulk registration to refer to the behavior of reg-
istering a batch of domains during a period of a few minutes. Since
the registrants’ information and behavior are not directly observ-
able in the zone updates, we can only infer that a group of domains
may represent a bulk registration by observing updates with mul-
tiple domains within the same (cid:104)registrar, 5-minute-epoch(cid:105) tuple.
The granularity of data that we have provides only an approxima-
tion of the behavior of each registrant because different registrants
may register simultaneously from the same registrar, and the same
registrant could spread their registrations across multiple registrars.
Still, we observe the general tendency for spammers to perform
registrations in batches, as we develop below.

Figure 8 shows the distribution of the number of spammer do-
mains registered in the same epoch. The X-axis shows the number
of spammer domains observed for a given registrar within a single
epoch, and the Y -axis shows the cumulative percentage of spam-
mer domains within such epochs. The inlay shows that 50% of
the spammer domains were registered in groups of ten or more.
We ﬁnd that only 20% of the spammer domains got registered in

Figure 7: Cumulative distribution of spammer domains on DNS
servers (ordered by toxicity).

domains (i.e., with toxicity 100%) only account for about 10% of
all spammer domains.

Table 4 lists the top nameservers associated with spammer do-
mains, in terms of the total number of spammer domains that they
host. We group servers together if their Jaccard index exceeds 0.95,
to ensure grouping similarity; we use a regular expression to rep-
resent groups of similar domains. For nameservers in common
groups, we calculate the metrics based on common domains. The
second column shows the number of common spammer domains
for each DNS server group; we rank the groups in descending order
of the number of common spammer domains for that group. The
third and fourth columns indicate the server toxicity and the Jac-
card index of duplication, respectively. When spammer domains
are sheltered in large registrars (like Moniker or eNom), these
registrars provide and operate their authoritative DNS servers, also
hosting a large number of legitimate domains.

It becomes clear from these results that although spammers pre-
fer certain nameservers in some cases, no clear-cut separation exists
between nameservers used for spamming and those used for benign
purposes. Hence, our earlier hope fails to pan out: we do not see
how to fruitfully leverage the nameservers associated with domain
registrations to identify spammer domains. In the next section, we
turn to exploring to what degree the patterns that spammer regis-
trations exhibit can help distinguish spammer domain registrations
from benign ones.

0100020003000400050006000700080000102030405060708090100Toxicity of the DNS serverDNS servers ordered by their toxicity  0102030405060708090100Cumulative % of spammer domainsToxicity of the DNS serverCumulative % of spammer domains69pick a ﬁxed quantile, such as “treat as spikes all registrations larger
than the 99th percentile of a given registrar’s registration sizes”,
then we will necessarily deﬁne a subset of each registrar’s activity
as “abnormally large”—failing to capture the notion of a qualitative
difference.

Instead, we strive to develop a principled approach to identify
qualitatively different (abnormally large) registration epochs, as
follows. We hypothesize that a single model can capture the bulk of
a registrar’s registration activity (i.e., the distribution of how many
names the registrar registers during each of its epochs). We then
look for epochs during which, according to that model, the volume
of names registered was exceedingly unlikely (in a probabilistic
sense). We deem such epochs as qualitatively different, and clas-
sify the corresponding set of registrations as a spike.

The ﬁrst question we face concerns what sort of model to use
to capture regular registrar activity. If registrars receive a steady
stream of customers who act independently of one another, and
each registers a single name, then a Poisson process should capture
the corresponding activity well: during each epoch, the registrar
registers a number of names corresponding to the number of cus-
tomers who arrived since the last epoch. For this model, all we need
to identify is the rate at which the customers arrive at the registrar
with their requests. However, we would expect that diurnal patterns
would cause the arrival rate at each registrar to vary over the course
of each day, and indeed from inspection we ﬁnd that this is the case.
We adjust for this consideration by separately computing for each
registrar the mean number of names they registered for each hour
of the day, analogous to the nonhomogeneous Poisson processes
used previously in characterizing network trafﬁc [23]. For exam-
ple, we determine a registrar’s registration rate per epoch as the
average over all epochs between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m., and then use
that rate to parameterize a Poisson process to capture the number
of registrations that we expect to occur in each such epoch.

We explored this simple Poisson model and found that while it
works well for some registrars, for many registrars it often fails to
produce convincing ﬁts to the body of the distribution of names
registered per epoch. This provides evidence that customers do
not arrive at a registrar independently from one another, the rates
at which they do vary signiﬁcantly more rapidly than on a per-hour
basis, and/or customers sometimes register more than a single name
at a time in normal activity.

The ﬁrst two of these possibilities appear somewhat at odds
with how we expect users to function under normal circumstances,
which leads us to consider instead the third option. By employing
a compound Poisson process, we can capture customers who arrive
independently at a ﬁxed rate, but each of whom makes a number
of registrations drawn from a given distribution. The general com-
pound Poisson formalism does not require a particular family for
this second distribution. However, we achieved quite good results
by using a second Poisson distribution; we later discovered that
previous work has also modeled consumer purchase behaviors us-
ing a compound Poisson process that employs a second Poisson
distribution [26].

of domain registrations per epoch as Y =(cid:80)N

In summary, for normal registrar activity we capture the number
i=1 Xi, where N rep-
resents the number of registrants during the epoch, and follows one
Poisson distribution, and Xi (1 ≤ i ≤ N) are i.i.d. Poisson distri-
butions capturing the number of domains each registrant registers.
For this model, we have:

E(Y ) = E(N )E(Xi)

V ar(Y ) = E(N )[V ar(Xi) + E(Xi)2]

Figure 8: Distribution of bulk spammer domain registration from
the same registrar and epoch.

isolation (with no other spammer domains), but more than 10% in
batches exceeding 200 spammer domains.

We conﬁrmed that the prevalence of multiple spammer domains
registered together is not simply a reﬂection of general “overcrowd-
ing”. In particular, when we examined the registration patterns for
the ten registrars (other than GoDaddy) responsible for about 70%
of all spammer domains (per Table 3), we observe that only 8%
of all registration epochs contained any activity involving spammer
domains. Indeed, only Trunkoz has more than 20% of its epochs
including such domains; for this particular registrar, about 60% of
the epochs involve registrations of spammer domains, indicating
that this registrar clearly represents an outlier in terms of reﬂecting
consistently bad behavior.

Thus, we see a general trend reﬂecting behavior where many
(but not all) spammer domains are registered in bulk. In the next
section, we attempt to capture this notion in more principled terms
by ﬁtting the bulk of temporal registration patterns to a compound
Poisson process and identifying registration spikes as epochs that
deviate signiﬁcantly from this distribution.
7.2 Detecting Abnormal Registration Batches
The evidence from the previous section suggests that spammers
often register multiple domains at the same time. This phenomenon
motivates us to identify a way to determine whether a registrar’s set
of registrations during a given epoch is “abnormally large”. If so,
then we posit that those registrations are more likely to reﬂect do-
main registration activity by spammers. We aim to identify regis-
tration activity behavior that qualitatively differs from routine (and
thus, we presume, likely benign) activity. As noted above, we refer
to such a set of registrations as a “spike”.

Developing a model for registration batch size. Our challenge is
to determine that a given set of registrations crosses the line into
“abnormally large”, thus constituting a spike. The difﬁculty we
face is that simple approaches for spike detection can lack sound-
ness. For example, simply setting a single threshold (registrations
per epoch) may cause us to miss numerous spikes that appear in the
registrations for some of the smaller registrars, since for those reg-
istrars, an abnormally large set of registrations might not be all that
large in terms of absolute volume. If, on the other hand, we instead

0501001502002503003504000  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Counts of spammer domains from the same registrar and epochCumulative % of spammer domains01020300  20 40 60 80 10070Figure 9: Compound Poisson processes ﬁtted to the count of registrations per epoch for 4 registrars (hourly window, 10AM–11AM ET).

Fitting the distribution. Given this model, we now turn to how to
ﬁt it to a given registrar’s activity. (A reminder, we do this for each
hour of the day separately, to accommodate diurnal patterns.) We
need to estimate N’s parameter, λN , and that for the Xi, λX. Given
they are Poisson distributions, we have: E(N ) = λN , E(Xi) =
λX, and V ar(Xi) = λX, and therefore:

λX =

V ar(Y )

E(Y )

− 1, λN =

E(Y )

λX

.

Of course, we cannot simply compute these estimates from each
registrar’s registration process because our goal is precisely to try
to identify registration events that do not conform to the registrar’s
usual activity. For any given registrar, we do not know whether any
of these qualitatively different events even exist, but we have strong
conﬁdence that they do exist for at least some registrars.

We thus reﬁne the process of ﬁtting the distribution based on the
following intuition. Because the events we seek to detect reﬂect
abnormally large registration batches, they will occur in the upper
tail of the distribution of all of a registrar’s registrations. There-
fore, for each registrar we progressively apply different truncation
thresholds (proportion of the upper tail to discard) to see whether

omitting extreme tail values provides us with a better ﬁt of the re-
maining data to the compound Poisson process. Note that if all of
the registration events indeed conform to the same compound Pois-
son process, then we would expect to do no better—and possibly
a bit worse—as we discard upper tail events, since these in fact
simply reﬂect the natural extremes of the process.

i log2( P (i)

DKL(P||Q) = (cid:80)

We use KL divergence to assess how well the model ﬁts a
truncated portion of a registrar’s activity: given two probabil-
ity distributions P and Q, the KL divergence of Q from P is
Q(i) )P (i), which captures the informa-
tion lost when we use Q to approximate P . The smaller the KL
divergence, the better a model ﬁts the data. For each registrar, we
compute the KL divergence for all of its data versus that for a com-
pound Poisson processes ﬁtted to that data; the same but using the
data with the upper 99.5% tail discarded; again, but discarding the
upper 99.0% tail; etc., through the 90% tail (i.e., we discard the
top 10% of largest registration events). We then take as the best ﬁt
the tail truncation (if any) that provides the lowest KL divergence.
To demonstrate the ﬁtting results, Figure 9 shows the models and
epoch distributions of the ﬁrst 4 registrars listed in Table 3 regard-
ing to the hourly window between 10 AM and 11 AM US Eastern
Time.

02040608010000.0050.010.0150.020.0250.030.0350.040.0450.05Count of registrations in an epochProbabilityeNom, Inc.  datamodel01020304000.10.20.30.40.5Count of registrations in an epochProbabilityMoniker Online Services, Inc.  datamodel01020304050607000.010.020.030.040.050.060.07Count of registrations in an epochProbabilityTucows.com Co.  datamodel0510152000.10.20.30.40.5Count of registrations in an epochProbabilityINTERNET.bs Corp.  datamodel71probability ≤ 10−4. With that deﬁnition, we ﬁnd about 15% of
all domains were registered in spikes; in contrast, 42% of spammer
domains were registered in such spikes.

8. DOMAIN REGISTRATION PATTERNS
Spammers can potentially use different strategies to decide on
which names to register for use in their campaigns. In this section
we analyze the history of domains registered by spammers to assess
the different approaches they use. We ﬁrst deﬁne different types of
registrations in terms of the domain life cycle discussed in §2. We
then show that some types are signiﬁcantly more likely than others
to correlate with spammer domains. We ﬁnish with a look at the
nature of the names spammers choose when creating new domains.
8.1 Domain Categories

The most basic property of a domain registration concerns
whether the domain is brand-new, i.e., has never appeared in the
zone before, and thus now gets registered for the ﬁrst time. Such
domains have no registration history.

On the other hand, a re-registration reﬂects a name that previ-
ously appeared in the zone that the registrant now registers once
more after its expiry from the previous owners. For re-registration
domains we possess registration history, such as previous regis-
trar(s), registration time(s) and deletion time(s).

We further characterize re-registered domains as either drop-
catch or retread. The former refers to a domain re-registered im-
mediately after its expiry, a phenomenon that occurs quite fre-
quently [7]. Conversely, if some time elapses between a domain’s
prior deletion and its re-registration, then we term it as a “retread”.
Thus, the “drop-catch” and “retread” categories are mutually ex-
clusive, and together comprise all members of the “re-registration”
category.
8.2 Prevalence of Registration Patterns

How common is each registration pattern? We deﬁne a do-
main registration as drop-catch if the domain was deleted and re-
registered in the same 5-minute epoch. If more time elapses for
a re-registered domain, then we consider it a retread. Among the
spammer .com domains that were registered over the 5 months,
68% were brand-new, 30% were retread, and 2% were drop-catch.

Which registrations are more likely to reﬂect spammer do-
mains? To better understand the role of each type of registration in
spamming activity, we investigate the conditional probability that
a registration reﬂects a spammer domain, given a speciﬁc category
of registration. For example, to calculate the conditional probabil-
ity of observing a spammer domain given that the registration is a
retread, we divide the count of domains that are both retread and
spammer by the count of retread domains.

This procedure then gives us the conditional probabilities of be-
ing a spammer domain given that the registration is retread, drop-
catch, or brand-new as 1.34%, 0.33%, and 1.01%, respectively. Re-
tread and brand-new have higher conditional probabilities of re-
ﬂecting spammer domains compared to drop-catch registrations.
One possible explanation for this could be that spammers simply
use drop-catch domains less often in their spam campaigns. Usu-
ally registrars charge higher prices to purchase drop-catch domains;
for example, three major drop catching services—Namejet.com,
Pool.com, and Snapnames.com—charge $59, $60, and $69, respec-
tively, for drop-catch registrations, signiﬁcantly higher than typi-
cal domain registration rates of around $8–12 per registration [9].

Figure 10: Percentages of domains deemed as registered in spikes
according to different thresholds.

If we ﬁnd that this ﬁt worked best with some of the upper tail
truncated, then this provides evidence that the most extreme regis-
tration epochs behave qualitatively differently from the bulk of the
epochs. We can in addition then compute the probability of ob-
serving those extreme events given the model ﬁtted to the truncated
data. If the extreme events are not in fact all that unlikely, then they
may simply reﬂect stochastic ﬂuctuations of a single underlying
(compound Poisson) model. For example, if when truncating the
upper 1% tail, we ﬁnd that truncated model predicts probabilities
for the points in the tail as 0.5%, then in fact those points are not so
extreme, given the model, and we should not consider them as re-
ﬂecting qualitatively different behavior. On the other hand, if those
points have predicted probabilities of 0.005%, then they are quite
unlikely, bolstering evidence that they represent a fundamentally
different process.

In the next section, we reﬁne the model by assessing each of
these probabilities and explain how we make a ﬁnal determina-
tion of whether a given registration epoch reﬂects a truly abnormal
“spike”.
7.3 Reﬁning Threshold Probabilities

The compound Poisson model that we have derived enables us to
assess the probability of observing a given number of domains reg-
istered by a registrar in a ﬁve-minute epoch. A low probability indi-
cates a rare event; if the probability is sufﬁciently low, we can then
conclude the presence of an “abnormal” spike. Figure 10 shows
the number of domains that were registered in spikes depending on
how low we set this probability; the X-axis is log-scaled. The blue
dashed curve shows the proportion for all newly registered .com
domains, and the red solid curve shows the same statistic for spam-
mer domains. Spammer domains appear in spikes with a much
higher likelihood.
We also observe that the slope of the curves increases signiﬁ-
cantly at a probability of 10−3, suggesting a modal change at that
point. For this range of probabilities, the model incorporates spikes
that arise simply due to stochastic ﬂuctuations of the normal model,
rather than reﬂecting qualitatively different registration behavior.
To avoid mis-classifying registration events for this range of prob-
abilities, we propose deﬁning a spike as a registration size with

                                                                                01020304050607010−2010−1810−1610−1410−1210−1010−810−610−410−2Percentage of domains considered in spikes (%)The probability threshold to define spikes (log scale)  spammer domains in spikesdomains in spikes72Figure 11: Conditional probabilities of registrations reﬂecting
spammer domains given that the registration appeared in a spike,
for retread, drop-catch, and brand-new registrations.

Thus, drop-catch registrations appear signiﬁcantly less economical
for spammers.

Interestingly, if we also condition on the registration event oc-
curring in a spike, certain types of registrations become much more
likely to reﬂect spammer domains. Figure 11 shows the conditional
probability of observing a spammer domain given a speciﬁc cate-
gory and registration occurring in a spike (as deﬁned in §7). The
X-axis indicates the probability thresholds in log scale. Each curve
shows the conditional probability of a spammer domain for differ-
ent spike detection threshold values. The red solid curve shows
that the conditional probability of a spammer domain given that the
registration is a retread and appears in a spike reaches as high as
6%, signiﬁcantly higher than the conditional probability of a given
spammer domain being a retread alone (1.34%). This observation
indicates spammers are adept at ﬁnding previously used but expired
domains and re-registering them in bulk. The black dashed curve
shows the same statistic for brand-new domains; for this category,
the conditional probability of spammer domains roughly doubles
when observing a spike. The highest conditional probability for
spammer domains occurs around a threshold of 10−4, which indi-
cates that when spammers register new domains in bulk, the spikes
may not be as large as they are for registration spikes for other
categories of domains. This difference may arise from the difﬁ-
culty of ﬁnding large numbers of brand-new domain names that are
suitable for use in spam campaigns. Finally, the conditional proba-
bilities for spammer domains occurring in drop-catch registrations
are small and do not vary signiﬁcantly depending on the detection
threshold.
8.3 Retread Registration Patterns

We have seen that spammers commonly re-register expired do-
mains, especially when performing bulk registrations.
Informa-
tion about domain expiration is publicly released via various chan-
nels [22, 29]; spammers, of course, have access to this information
and appear to exploit it when selecting the domains to register for
subsequent spam campaigns. The majority of the retread regis-
trations that reﬂect spammer domains were deleted from the zone
within 90 days, which indicates that spammers tend to select do-

Figure 12: Distribution of days between domain deletion and re-
registration.

mains that have expired recently (although not so recently as to
qualify as drop-catch domains). We now examine the registration
patterns of retread domain registrations in more detail.

Do spammers perform reconnaissance to determine whether
a re-registered domain has been previously blacklisted? We
study whether the retread registrations that reﬂect spammer do-
mains have typically appeared in spammer activity in the time pe-
riod before the spammer decided to re-register the domain. This
analysis allows us to better understand whether spammers specif-
ically aim to re-register expired domains with clean histories. We
use both the blacklist reports and spam trap observations from the
preceding ﬁve months—from October 2011 to February 2012—
as our source of historical information about spammer domains.
(The SURBL blacklist data was only available for October and
November 2011, but we also use it for historical information about
spammer domains.) Only 6.8% of the retread registrations during
March–July 2012 that reﬂected spammer domains had ever previ-
ously appeared in a blacklist, which suggests that spammers indeed
deliberately re-register expired domains with clean histories.

How long are retread domains dormant between periods of reg-
istration? Next, we investigate the amount of time that typically
elapses between domain expiration and a retread registration. The
distribution of the dormancy periods for retread registrations that do
not reﬂect spammer domains is much more uniform than the distri-
bution for spammer domains, which tend to be reused more quickly
after they expire. Figure 12 shows a cumulative distribution of the
dormancy period for retread registrations; more than 65% of spam-
mer domains were dormant for less than 90 days. If we condition
on retread domains dormant for less than three months, and regis-
tered in moderately sized spikes (according to a threshold probabil-
ity of 10−4), the conditional probability of a retread domain being
a spammer domain is 7.7%, again signiﬁcantly higher than the con-
ditional probability of being a spammer domain based on being a
retread registration alone (1.34%).
8.4 Naming Patterns for Brand-New Domains
We now study the naming conventions that spammers use when
registering brand-new domains, focusing in particular on such do-

                                                                                0123456710−2010−1810−1610−1410−1210−1010−810−610−410−2Conditional probability of spammer domain (%)The probability threshold to define spikes (log scale)  given as retread and in spikesgiven as drop−catch and in spikesgiven as brand−new and in spikes0901802703604505406307208109009900102030405060708090100Days between deletion and re−registrationCumulative % of retread domains  spammer retread domainsnon−spammer retread domains73domains are less than 3 months old; spammer domains are often
only used for short periods of time; and current blacklists (with the
exception of Spamhaus DBL) identify spammer domains at time-
of-use rather than time-of-registration.

We based our study on a large, ﬁne-grained dataset that reﬂected
all changes to the .com zone over a ﬁve-month period, as seen dur-
ing ﬁve-minute intervals. We then analyzed this data in conjunction
with several spam trap and blacklist feeds as post facto indicators
of spammer domains. After conﬁrming the previous ﬁnding that
just a handful of registrars account for the bulk of spammer do-
main registrations, we examined the registration process of each
registrar, ﬁnding two distinct types of registration activity. In the
ﬁrst, predominant mode, the number of domains registrars regis-
ter is well-described by a compound Poisson process. By ﬁtting
such a process to the bulk of a registrar’s registration epochs, we
can associate probabilities with “outlier” epochs that register large
numbers of domains, allowing us to identify registration spikes that
qualitatively differ from the registrar’s usual registration practices.
We then showed that spammers often register their domains in such
spikes, whereas non-spammers do so much less frequently.

Spammers also often prefer to re-register domains that previ-
ously existed in the zone but subsequently expired. While spam-
mers do not engage in “drop-catching” (immediately re-registering
domains that have just expired), they prefer domains that have re-
cently expired (within the past few months) and that in their previ-
ous life did not appear to be associated with spamming.

We also analyzed two other time-of-registration features: (1) the
degree to which spammers tend to use distinctive nameservers to
host their domains, and (2) whether newly registered spammer do-
mains contain common English words. We did not ﬁnd much dis-
criminatory power for either of these features.

Other than a couple of particularly abuse-prone registrars—
which by themselves do not account for a signiﬁcant portion of
spam domains—none of the time-of-registration features that we
examined by themselves serve as a “smoking gun”. Nevertheless,
many features exhibit different behavior for spammer domains ver-
sus non-spammer domains, suggesting that an apt application of
machine learning may enable the development of an accurate time-
of-registration detector that can enable us to nip spammer domain
registrations in the bud.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the U.S. Army Research Of-
ﬁce under MURI grant W911NF-09-1-0553, by the Ofﬁce of Naval
Research under MURI grant number N000140911042, and by the
National Science Foundation under grants 0831535, 1111723, and
1237265. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reﬂect the views of the sponsors.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Antonakakis, R. Perdisci, D. Dagon, W. Lee, and N. Feamster.

Building a Dynamic Reputation System for DNS. In Proc. 19th
USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, DC, Aug. 2010.

[2] M. Antonakakis, R. Perdisci, W. Lee, N. Vasiloglou, and D. Dagon.
Detecting Malware Domains at the Upper DNS Hierarchy. In Proc.
20th USENIX Security Symposium, San Francisco, CA, Aug. 2011.

[3] M. Antonakakis, R. Perdisci, Y. Nadji, N. Vasiloglou, S. Abu-Nimeh,
W. Lee, and D. Dagon. From Throw-Away Trafﬁc to Bots: Detecting
the Rise of DGA-Based Malware. In Proc. 20th USENIX Security
Symposium, San Francisco, CA, Aug. 2011.

[4] L. Bilge, E. Kirda, C. Kruegel, and M. Balduzzi. EXPOSURE:

Finding Malicious Domains Using Passive DNS Analysis. In 18th

Figure 13: Cumulative percentage of (brand-new) domains that
appear in the same registration spike and have at least one English
subword in common with another domain in the spike.

mains registered in spikes (once again using 10−4 as the thresh-
old probability for deﬁning a spike). We ﬁrst compare the propor-
tion of spammer and non-spammer domains that are registered in
spikes that contain English words. To do so, we compare the do-
main names against a dictionary, looking for matches against words
of at least four letters. We ﬁnd that about 84% of the brand-new
spammer domain registrations occurring in spikes contain an En-
glish word, versus about 82% of such non-spammer registrations.
Thus, it appears that spammers create names that for the most part
will appear plausible, as opposed to employing simple algorithms
to crank out gobbledygook. Perhaps spammers seek to avoid detec-
tion by domain reputation algorithms that use entropy as a feature
(e.g., [3]), or aim to diminish user suspicions and increase the like-
lihood that users will visit the corresponding website.

We hypothesized that when spammers register new domains in
bulk, that they may register domains that represent various combi-
nations of English words that relate to the campaign itself, perhaps
with slight variations (e.g., one might expect a spam campaign in-
volving watches to involve the registration of many domains con-
taining the word “watch”). To test this hypothesis, we counted the
number of brand-new domains in the same registration spike that
share a common word, again considering only English words that
are at least four characters long. Figure 13 shows the results of
this analysis; many domains in the same spike share no common
English words, yet the spammer domains show a slightly higher
tendency to have common words in spikes. For example, about
40% of brand-new domains that appear in the same spike contain a
common subword overall, yet slightly more than 50% of brand-new
spammer domains contain a common subword when they appear in
the same registration spike.

9. SUMMARY

In this work we have analyzed the domain registration behav-
ior of spammers, including both the infrastructure that they use to
register their domains and the patterns that they exhibit when reg-
istering them. Our motivation in exploring these behaviors is ulti-
mately to facilitate time-of-registration detection of such domains,
enabling proactive blocking. We found that nearly half of spammer

0204060801000102030405060708090100% of domains having common subword in the same spikeCumulative % of domains  spammer brand−new domains in spikesbrand−new domains in spikes74Annual Network & Distributed System Security Symposium, San
Diego, CA, Feb. 2011.

[5] S. E. Coull, A. M. White, T.-F. Yen, F. Monrose, and M. K. Reiter.

Understanding Domain Registration Abuses. In Proc. 25th
International Information Security Conference, Brisbane, Australia,
Sept. 2010.

[6] P. Danzig, K. Obraczka, and A. Kumar. An Analysis of Wide-Area

Name Server Trafﬁc: A Study of the Internet Domain Name System.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 22(4):292,
1992.

[7] How to Snatch an Expiring Domain.

http://www.mikeindustries.com/blog/archive/
2005/03/how-to-snatch-an-expiring-domain, 2005.

[8] DomainTools. http://www.domaintools.com, 2012.
[9] Backorder Price Wars: NameJet.com Lowers Minimum Bid On

Pending Delete Domains to $59.
http://tinyurl.com/4mb2tgo, 2011.

[10] M. Felegyhazi, C. Kreibich, and V. Paxson. On the potential of

proactive domain blacklisting. In 3rd USENIX Workshop on
Large-Scale Exploits and Emergent Threats, San Jose, CA, Apr.
2010.

[11] Godaddy Bulk Registration. http:

//www.godaddy.com/domains/searchbulk.aspx, 2012.
[12] S. Hao, N. Feamster, and R. Pandrangi. Monitoring the Initial DNS
Behavior of Malicious Domains. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Internet
Measurement Conference, Berlin, Germany, Nov. 2011.

[13] S. Hollenbeck. VeriSign Registry Registrar Protocol Version 2.0.0.

Internet Engineering Task Force, Nov. 2003. RFC 3632.
[14] S. Hollenbeck. Extensible Provisioning Protocol. Internet

Engineering Task Force, Aug. 2009. RFC 5730.

[15] .COM Agreement Appendix 7, Functional and Performance
Speciﬁcations. http://www.icann.org/en/about/
agreements/registries/verisign/
appendix-07-01mar06-en.htm, 2006.

[16] Add Grace Period Limits Policy.

http://www.icann.org/en/resources/registries/
agp/agp-policy-17dec08-en.htm, 2008.

[17] J. Jung, E. Sit, H. Balakrishnan, and R. Morris. DNS Performance

and the Effectiveness of Caching. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Internet
Measurement Workshop, San Fransisco, CA, Nov. 2001.

[18] K. Levchenko, N. Chachra, B. Enright, M. Felegyhazi, C. Grier,

T. Halvorson, C. Kanich, C. Kreibich, H. Liu, D. McCoy,
A. Pitsillidis, N. Weaver, V. Paxson, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage.
Click Trajectories: End-to-End Analysis of the Spam Value Chain. In

Proc. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA, May
2011.

[19] H. Liu, K. Levchenko, M. Felegyhazi, C. Kreibich, G. Maier, G. M.
Voelker, and S. Savage. On the effects of registrar-level intervention.
In 4th USENIX Workshop on Large-Scale Exploits and Emergent
Threats, Boston, MA, Mar. 2011.

[20] P. V. Mockapetris. Domain names - concepts and facilities. Internet

Engineering Task Force, Nov. 1987. RFC 1034.

[21] Moniker Bulk Registration.

https://www.moniker.com/bulkdomainname.jsp,
2012.

[22] NameJet Domain Name Aftermarket.

http://www.namejet.com/pages/downloads.aspx,
2012.

[23] V. Paxson and S. Floyd. Wide-area trafﬁc: The failure of poisson

modeling. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 3(3):226–244,
2005.

[24] Rogues and Registrars: Top 10 List.

http://blog.legitscript.com/2012/10/
rogues-registrars-top-10-list-october-2012,
2012.

[25] List of ICANN Accredited Registrars. http://www.icann.
org/registrar-reports/accredited-list.html,
2013.

[26] J. Springael and I. V. Nieuwenhuyse. A Lost Sales Inventory Model

with A Compound Poisson Demand Pattern. Working paper, July
2005.

[27] Symantec Intelligence Report. http://www.symantec.com/

theme.jsp?themeid=state_of_spam, 2012.

[28] Verisign Who was Service.

http://www.icann.org/en/registries/rsep/
verisign-whowas-01jul09-en.pdf, 2009.

[29] Verisign Domain Countdown.

http://domaincountdown.verisignlabs.com, 2011.

[30] The Domain Name Industry Brief. http://www.verisigninc.

com/en_US/why-verisign/research-trends/
domain-name-industry-brief/index.xhtml, 2012.

[31] S. Yadav, A. K. K. Reddy, A. Reddy, and S. Ranjan. Detecting

Algorithmically Generated Malicious Domain Names. In Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference, Melbourne, Australia,
Nov. 2010.

[32] Root Zone Database.

http://www.iana.org/domains/root/db, 2012.

75