Are You Ready to Lock?

Understanding User Motivations for Smartphone Locking Behaviors

Serge Egelman1,2, Sakshi Jain1, Rebecca S. Portnoff1, Kerwell Liao3,

Sunny Consolvo3, and David Wagner1

1University of California, Berkeley

Berkeley, CA

2International Computer Science Institute

Berkeley, CA

{egelman,sakshi.jain,rpotteng,daw}@eecs.berkeley.edu

egelman@icsi.berkeley.edu

3Google, Inc.

Mountain View, CA

{kerwell,sconsolvo}@google.com

ABSTRACT
In addition to storing a plethora of sensitive personal and work
information, smartphones also store sensor data about users and
their daily activities. In order to understand users’ behaviors and
attitudes towards the security of their smartphone data, we con-
ducted 28 qualitative interviews. We examined why users choose
(or choose not) to employ locking mechanisms (e.g., PINs) and
their perceptions and awareness about the sensitivity of the data
stored on their devices. We performed two additional online exper-
iments to quantify our interview results and the extent to which sen-
sitive data could be found in a user’s smartphone-accessible email
archive. We observed a strong correlation between use of secu-
rity features and risk perceptions, which indicates rational behav-
ior. However, we also observed that most users likely underesti-
mate the extent to which data stored on their smartphones pervades
their identities, online and ofﬂine.

Keywords
Smartphone security; risk perceptions; human behavior

Categories and Subject Descriptors
[Operating Systems]: Security and Protection—Access
D.4.6.
[Management of Computing
Controls, Authentication; K.6.5.
and Information Systems]: Security and protection—Authentica-
tion

1.

INTRODUCTION

As of 2013, over 90% of Americans claimed to own mobile
phones, the majority of whom use their devices to access the Inter-
net, check email, or use third party applications [15]. This means
that they trust their devices to store and access large amounts of
sensitive data, ranging from contacts to ﬁnancial details (indeed
35% use their devices for online banking [17]). At the same time,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS’14, November 3–7, 2014, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2957-6/14/11 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660273.

these devices are prone to loss: a 2012 report by the Pew Internet
Project estimated that nearly a third of cell phone users have had
a device lost or stolen [8]. Lookout estimates that this comes at a
cost of $30 billion per year [26].

The cost of losing a smartphone is more than simply the replace-
ment cost of the hardware, as the data that can be found on the
device is likely to be sensitive. Symantec performed an experiment
by intentionally “losing” 50 smartphones in ﬁve major cities and
observed that while 96% of the devices had their data examined
by those who found them, only 50% of the ﬁnders attempted to
return the devices [39]. Yet, despite these risks, previous research
suggests that 35% of smartphone users do not lock their devices to
prevent unauthorized persons from using them [36].

We performed qualitative interviews to understand users’ moti-
vations for choosing whether or not to lock their devices. Of our
28 participants, we observed that 29% (8 of 28) did not lock their
devices. Their top reasons included concerns about emergency per-
sonnel not being able to identify them, not having their devices
returned if lost, and not believing they had any data worth protect-
ing. An online survey of 2,518 smartphone users corroborated our
ﬁndings. We suggest that many concerns that prevent users from
locking their phones can be alleviated by simple design changes.

Finally, we performed an online experiment to evaluate whether
participants’ beliefs about the lack of sensitive data on their devices
were well-founded. We noted that all of our interview participants
used their devices to access their email accounts, without requir-
ing additional authentication. In our online experiment, we found
that of our 995 participants, many reported ﬁnding their social se-
curity numbers (20%), credit/debit card numbers (16 and 17%, re-
spectively), bank account numbers (26%), birth dates (46%), email
passwords (30%), and/or home addresses (76%) stored in their email
accounts. Yet, the presence of this data correlated with locking be-
haviors, suggests that some users may be making rational decisions
to not lock their devices.

We contribute the following:
• We qualitatively show why users choose or choose not to
lock their smartphones and quantify the prevalence of these
rationales among the smartphone-owning U.S. population.
• We discuss how these ﬁndings can be used to improve mobile
• Our studies suggest that access to email is a seriously un-
derestimated threat to personal information. We attempt to
quantify the likelihood of ﬁnding different types of sensitive
information in an email account.

security and the user experience.

7502. RELATED WORK

In this section we discuss previous work on smartphone locking
methods, alternatives to the existing mechanisms, and users’ mo-
bile security perceptions.
2.1 Current Methods and Attacks

Despite a majority of users taking proactive steps to protect their
smartphone data, many mobile authentication mechanisms can be
defeated through relatively simple attacks. For instance, the un-
lock codes chosen by users are often relatively predictable and can
therefore be determined by simple guessing [7, 1, 35, 40]. Other
threats investigated in the literature include shoulder-surﬁng [14,
13], inference based on smudge patterns left on the screen [3, 38],
or malicious applications that abuse access to the device’s sensors
to infer the user’s unlock code [4, 32]. While these attacks could
pose a threat in certain speciﬁc situations, we suspect they have
limited relevance to most users’ everyday use of their phones.

Regarding common smartphone security behaviors, van Bruggen
et al. studied the adoption of smartphone locking methods among
Android users [36]. They observed that while 35% of their partici-
pants did not lock their devices, those who did were split three-to-
one in favor of Android’s pattern unlock feature over entering a nu-
meric PIN. von Zezschwitz et al. found that users perceive the pat-
tern unlock as being quicker and less error-prone than PINs, though
their quantitative data showed that reality is just the opposite: PIN
entry is both less error prone and quicker [37].

The most relevant work to our study was performed by Harbach
et al. [21]. They surveyed online participants about locking behav-
iors and risk perceptions. They followed this up with a month-long
experience sampling experiment in which ﬁeld participants were
periodically asked to report on the likelihood of someone shoulder
surﬁng when they unlocked their phones. Our work differs from
theirs in that they performed an in-depth quantitative study of the
likelihood of a particular threat model, whereas we examine the
magnitude of harm stemming from a broad range of threat models
by comparing participants’ perceptions with the sensitivity of the
data actually stored on their mobile devices. Thus, we believe our
studies are complementary as together they provide a detailed as-
sessment of smartphone risks stemming from unauthorized access;
“a complete assessment of risk requires that the potential effects of
[a risk] be combined with the probability of occurrence” [33].
2.2 Alternative Mechanisms

Today’s mobile phones use a locked/unlocked security model
that was designed when the data stored on phones was limited to
call histories and the names and phone numbers of contacts. Cur-
rently, smartphone locking mechanisms prevent access to almost
all device functionality (with some exceptions, such as answering
calls, making emergency calls, or taking photos) when the device
is locked. Hayashi et al. investigated how well this two-state ac-
cess control model meets users’ needs and preferences, as well as
how receptive users would be to alternate ﬁne-grained access con-
trol policies and authentication mechanisms [22]. Most of their
participants wanted at least half of their applications to be accessi-
ble without requiring an unlock code, which suggests opportunities
for improving current locking mechanisms. Interestingly, partici-
pants wanted apps that contained personal data to be unavailable
when the device is locked, even though this included their most
frequently used applications (e.g., email).

As an alternative to the standard all-or-nothing smartphone ac-
cess control approach, Riva et al. proposed progressive authenti-
cation [27]. Using a variety of heuristics, their system determines
a level of conﬁdence in a user’s authenticity. It then determines

whether to require authentication based on the conﬁdence level and
the degree of protection the user had speciﬁed for each application.
Their system reduced the frequency with which users needed to
authenticate by 42% while still maintaining acceptable security.

Other researchers have proposed alternative authentication mech-
anisms that aim to increase usability so that more users will choose
to lock their devices. Takada and Kokubun suggested minor modiﬁ-
cations to the PIN entry mechanisms that could result in signiﬁcant
security gains at little usability cost [34]. Many researchers have
compared different types of graphical authentication mechanisms
to show that there are many viable alternatives to the standard PIN
or pattern approach [6, 10, 29]. Dunphy et al. showed that many
of the concerns preventing these graphical authentication systems
from being adopted are unfounded [16]. Others have proposed in-
creasing the security of gesture-based authentication mechanisms
on mobile devices by linking them to biometrics [28, 12]. For in-
stance, Frank et al. showed that an individual’s gesture style could
be used as a secondary authentication heuristic [18]. However, Ser-
wadda and Phoha showed that gesture styles could be observed and
replicated automatically [31].
2.3 User Perceptions and Behaviors

Chin et al. showed that many users are apprehensive about per-
forming private and/or ﬁnancially-sensitive tasks on their phones,
primarily because of fear of theft, mistrust of smartphone applica-
tions, and unfamiliarity with security features like remote wipe [11].
Chin et al. also showed that users are more concerned about pri-
vacy on their phones than on their laptops. Becher et al. provide
an overview of how security actually differs between mobile and
desktop devices [5].

Many smartphone users balance privacy concerns with the desire
to share their devices with others [22, 20]. Karlson et al. showed
that it is common for users to share their phones with up to 11 dif-
ferent people, despite these concerns [25]. They found that many
users are uncomfortable with guests having access to personal in-
formation such as voicemail, notes, ﬁles, email, SMS, and calen-
dars. However, some users may forgo locking their devices in order
to be able to easily share their devices with those close to them.

Despite research on the security, usability (i.e., false rejection
rate and time to authenticate), and vulnerabilities of smartphone
authentication mechanisms, we are unaware of prior work that has
qualitatively explored why people lock their smartphones. We are
also unaware of work that has examined users’ perceptions about
the sensitivity of the data stored on their phones vis à vis reality.
This research is necessary because it helps us to better understand
why some users may abstain from locking their phones, whether
they are rational in doing so, and how system designs can encour-
age better security behaviors.

3. METHODOLOGY

We performed structured interviews of 28 participants to gain
qualitative insights into the locking behaviors of smartphone users.
We used a grounded theory approach to understand why people
choose (or choose not) to lock their smartphones [19], and then
we quantiﬁed these results by performing a follow-up survey us-
ing 2,518 Google Consumer Survey (GCS) participants. Finally,
to compare participants’ risk perceptions with actual risks, we per-
formed a third online experiment with 995 Amazon Mechanical
Turk workers to measure the frequency with which different types
of sensitive information are stored in email (and therefore could be
accessed on an unlocked smartphone). In this section we describe
our recruiting method and procedure for the initial interviews.

7513.1 Recruitment

We placed an online recruitment advertisement on Craigslist in
January of 2014, under the Bay Area “et cetera jobs” section. The
title of the advertisement was, “smartphone owners - participate in
a study,” and it stated that the study was about how people use their
smartphones (the exact wording is presented in Appendix A). We
intentionally made no mention of locking or security, in order to not
prime them. Those interested in participating ﬁlled out an online
screening survey in which they provided information about their
age, gender, smartphone make and model, amount of time using
a smartphone, contact information, and availability. We screened
out those who were under 18 years of age or who had been using a
smartphone for under six months.

We contacted participants who met our screening qualiﬁcations
by email to schedule a time for them to visit our “laboratory” (i.e.,
a nearby coffee shop). We recruited 28 participants in this manner
and instructed them to bring their smartphones with them, as they
would be answering questions about how they use them. Partici-
pants showed up for individual sessions that lasted between 30 and
60 minutes. At the end of each session, we provided each partici-
pant with a $35 debit card.

Of our 28 participants, exactly half were male, and ages ranged
from 20 to 53 years old (µ = 31, σ = 9.6). Eleven were Android
users (39%), whereas the rest were iPhone users. While all par-
ticipants had owned a smartphone for over six months, the length
of ownership for their current devices ranged from 2 months to 3.5
years (µ = 16 months, σ = 9.1). Thus, the vast majority of our
participants had owned a previous smartphone (68% of 28).
3.2 Procedure

Each interview session took place in our “laboratory” with one
participant and two researchers. One researcher, the interviewer,
asked questions from a pre-determined list (i.e., structured inter-
views), while the other researcher took detailed notes. Both re-
searchers were able to ask follow-up questions or clariﬁcations if
a participant’s responses were unclear. After arriving, the partic-
ipant read and signed a consent form. Next, the interviewer ex-
plained that the purpose of the interview was to better understand
how participants interacted with their smartphones. Again, to avoid
priming, the security focus of the interview was not revealed until
towards the end, and even then, it was never made explicit. Our
questions fell into the following categories:

1. Background and General Usage: In the ﬁrst part of the in-
terviews, we asked participants to describe their smartphones
and the other computing devices that they regularly used. For
example, “What is the make and model of your current smart-
phone?,” “For how long have you been using this smart-
phone?,” and “Do you use a tablet, laptop, or desktop com-
puter?.” We also asked about the primary purpose of each
device (i.e., whether it is for personal or professional use).

2. Smartphone Apps and Accounts: Participants listed all third-

party applications installed on their smartphones. Next, we
asked them to describe the ones that they used most fre-
quently, speciﬁcally whether any of these applications have
user accounts associated with them, and whether those ac-
count credentials are saved on the phone or need to be en-
tered with each use. We prompted participants to describe
their use of applications in a few special categories: ﬁnan-
cial accounts, applications used for purchasing items, email
accounts, social networking, and ﬁle sharing/backup. The
purpose of these questions was to understand the sensitive
data that might be stored on each participant’s device.

3. Backup and Syncing Behaviors: We asked whether partici-
pants backup or sync their smartphones, their motivations for
doing so, and their methods. For comparison, we also asked
them whether they back up other devices they own (e.g., lap-
tops). The purpose of these questions was to estimate the
data loss impact of a lost or stolen device.

4. Locking Behaviors: We asked participants whether or not
they locked their smartphones, and if so, the method they
used to do so (e.g., PIN, drawing a pattern, etc.). We veri-
ﬁed their responses (i.e., we observed participants unlocking
their smartphones during the interview). We then asked par-
ticipants why they chose or chose not to lock their devices,
as well as whether they performed other types of security be-
haviors, both on their current and previous smartphones, as
well as on their other computing devices. For example, “Did
you use a security lock on your old smartphone?,” “When did
you ﬁrst start using a security lock on that phone?,” “Have
you ever forgotten your security lock?,” “Have you ever told
anyone else your security lock?,” and “Do you know the se-
curity lock of anyone else’s device?”

5. Sharing Behaviors: Finally, we asked participants whether
anyone else ever uses their devices and whether they ever use
others’ devices. This included speciﬁc scenarios about the
types of data that they would be concerned with other people
seeing, the personal and professional ramiﬁcations of a lost
or stolen device, and whether they had previously thought
about any of these issues.

Grounded theory is a well-established method for performing
qualitative research [19], in which hypotheses are only established
after a thorough examination of the data. Multiple researchers per-
form thematic analysis of interview data by independently reading
over participants’ responses to create lists of themes that each re-
searcher observed in the responses to each question. These themes
are known as “codes,” and this process is performed independently
to maximize the breadth of initial codes by preventing any one re-
searcher from dominating the process. Next, the researchers dis-
cuss their codes in order to merge their ﬁndings into a single “code-
book.” Using this codebook, each researcher independently codes
the data by reading through participants’ responses again. Finally,
the researchers discuss their codings, measure inter-rater agree-
ment, and then resolve any disagreements so that the resulting cod-
ings are unanimously agreed upon.

We digitally recorded each interview and transcribed the record-
ings. The transcriptions were used for all of the analysis in this pa-
per, with the second researcher’s notes available as backups. Next,
three researchers coded all 1,257 responses; the number of responses
per interview varied due to omissions and branching (e.g., partic-
ipants who did not use PINs to lock their smartphones did not re-
ceive questions about how they chose those PINs). Prior to meeting
to achieve consensus, the three independent coders disagreed on the
coding of 48 responses, achieving inter-rater agreement of 96%.1

4. RESULTS

Our primary goal was to better understand why smartphone users
choose to employ security locks on their devices. We observed our
28 participants interacting with their devices and found that 8 chose
not to lock them (29%). Of those who did, 18 used numerical PINs
(64%), one used Android’s pattern lock (4%), and one used a ﬁn-

1We coded over 70 questions, many of which had different possible
codes; we therefore found it infeasible to calculate Cohen’s kappa
separately for every coded question.

752gerprint (his was the only device with this capability). In the re-
mainder of this section, we provide details about how participants
use the locking mechanisms on their devices. We present explana-
tions for why participants chose to lock their devices, how those
decisions correlate with other security behaviors, and how these
behaviors are inﬂuenced by various risk perceptions.

4.1 How Locks Are Used

Of the 20 participants who locked their smartphones, fourteen
(70%) reported enabling this feature as soon as they purchased
their devices, whereas the remaining six enabled it after they had
already owned their smartphones for several months. Eighteen of
our participants used numerical PINs, and of these, half admitted to
choosing their PINs based on PINs they used elsewhere, such as at
an ATM or on a bicycle lock. One participant said that he initially
chose a unique PIN for his smartphone as a good security practice,
but after repeatedly forgetting it, he ultimately reverted to using
a PIN that he used elsewhere. Seven participants (37% of 19)2
said they had previously changed their unlock codes; four of whom
did so to make them more memorable, whereas three participants
changed them to make them harder for others to guess. We asked
participants whether they ever felt that unlocking their devices was
a nuisance, and while eight said yes (40%), we observed no signif-
icant correlation with whether or not their smartphone PINs were
used elsewhere. This suggests that the burden of remembering an
additional PIN is minimal, and that the nuisance associated with
unlocking a device may not be due to the memory aspect.

Another potential nuisance is having to enter an unlock code too
frequently (i.e., due to a device automatically locking after sitting
idly for too long). We asked participants to navigate to the settings
screen on their devices so that we could see the screen timeout in-
terval that was set. By default (at the time of this writing), Android
devices lock after 30 seconds of inactivity, whereas iOS devices
lock after 60 seconds. A total of eleven participants had changed
the default values (55% of 20), ten of whom made it longer so that
they would not have to enter their unlock codes so frequently (in-
creased to a median of 5 minutes), whereas one participant made
it shorter (decreased to 15 seconds). In each case, the participants
who extended the time cited the inconvenience of having to enter
unlock codes repeatedly, whereas the participant who decreased it
cited privacy reasons. This suggests that platform developers may
want to increase these default timeout intervals, lest some users be-
come annoyed and disable the locking mechanism altogether. For
example, P2 used a ﬁngerprint and said that he would not lock his
device if he was required to enter a PIN every time.

We were curious if security lock usage on a previous smartphone
would be a predictor of current security lock usage. Of our 28 to-
tal participants, seventeen reported owning a previous smartphone.
However, we observed no correlation between previously and cur-
rently using a security lock (r = −0.054, p < 0.840). Twelve
participants locked their previous smartphones, and of those, nine
continued to do so on their current phones. Four participants who
did not previously lock their phones started doing so.

Three participants reported locking previous smartphones, but
for various reasons decided not to lock their current smartphones.
One participant, P10, disabled it because he was concerned about
others being able to contact his girlfriend in the case of an emer-
gency: “I was worried that if I got into an accident and somebody
needed to call, like, my girlfriend, that they wouldn’t be able to get
into my phone.”

2We do not consider the participant who used a ﬁngerprint.

Another participant, P15, reevaluated his decision, and decided
that the PIN was more trouble than he believed his information was
worth: “it wasn’t useful for me to have to unlock it every time I
wanted to use my phone. I wasn’t in any worry that my phone was
going to be taken or anything like that.”

A third participant, P23, had locked his previous smartphone, but
simply forgot to set it up on this one: “It said choose a password.
I think this time I was eager to maybe do something else so I said,
like, remind me later.”
4.2 Reasons for Locking

Before priming participants with questions about security and
privacy, we asked why they chose to lock their smartphones. Six
themes emerged, which we classiﬁed into two different categories.
First, about two-thirds of our participants who locked their devices
(14 of 20) mentioned very speciﬁc scenarios that they were trying
to avoid. Second, the remaining third of participants (6 of 20) in-
dicated that they locked their devices out of a more general sense
of “good security behavior,” rather than to counter any particular
perceived threat.
4.2.1
The most frequently cited reason for locking one’s phone was
privacy: eight participants (40% of the 20 using security locks)
indicated that they chose to lock their devices to prevent people they
knew from snooping or using their phones without permission. Six
of these participants speciﬁcally mentioned protection from friends
and family. Responses included:

Speciﬁc Privacy and Security Concerns

“I don’t want, like, when people go through my pic-
tures without me knowing...not all of my pictures I want
other people to see” (P8)

“I had to pay, like, per minute...so I didn’t want any-
body including friends to use it, or anybody who was
at home or family. You know you might use my phone
without me knowing, so I had a PIN on there” (P9)

“I got really really tired of my friends picking up my
phone and checking my emails...like I don’t have any-
thing to hide, but it’s like...privacy” (P14)

“Privacy from [my] mom and [my] sister” (P20)

Two participants worked with children and were concerned about
snooping in their workplace environments. Speciﬁcally, P12, a
teacher, mentioned problems with thefts in her school: “so students
couldn’t get into it if they stole it.”

P17, who worked in a municipal recreation department, men-

tioned a similar rationale:

“I was coaching a little girls’ soccer team and they
were wanting to get on my phone and play with it and
stuff...I was like, I’m going to put this [lock] on there...not
that I have anything to hide from them, but who knows
what little 10 year olds are going to do...I never both-
ered changing it so now I just have it.”

We asked participants if they had ever told anyone their unlock
codes: only three of these eight participants had done so (38%),
whereas of the other 13 participants who locked their devices, twelve
had acknowledged sharing unlock codes with others (92%). This
correlation was statistically signiﬁcant (φ = −0.589, p < 0.007).
That is, those who were concerned about speciﬁc individuals were

753less likely to share their unlock codes than those only concerned
with strangers. Yet despite concerns about speciﬁc individuals,
most of these eight participants indicated that they were still com-
fortable allowing close friends and family to use their devices. In
fact, seven reported that someone else had used their phone in the
past four weeks (88% of 8). Thus, these participants were con-
cerned about regulating access to their devices, rather than locking
others out completely.

Similar to regulating when known individuals use the device, the
second most common rationale was preventing strangers from ac-
cessing devices. Speciﬁcally, six participants (30% of 20) men-
tioned the lock as either a theft deterrent or to prevent strangers
from accessing their personal information:

“I don’t do that [lock my phone] so that someone I
know can’t get in...” (P1)

“It at least prevents someone...from being able to pick
it up and messing around with it” (P4)

“Because otherwise my phone would just be able to be
accessed by anyone and I don’t want that. Also, I’m
automatically logged in to my email, my Facebook, a
lot of different things without having to put [in] a pass-
word” (P16)

“...[a thief] is not going to be able to use it” (P20)

P3, who used to work at an Apple Store, said he started using a
PIN because he was worried that he might leave his iPhone out and
customers would confuse it with a demo unit:

“I had more sensitive information on there, all my credit
card information, my bank information on there...I was
just more aware of what people would have access to.”

Three participants (15% of 20) mentioned that they enabled se-
curity locks on their smartphones after they personally had bad ex-
periences on a previous phone when they did not use a security
lock. For instance, P5 mentioned that a friend played a joke on
him by changing the default language to Russian: “my old phone,
someone took it and changed the settings...it was pretty hard to go
back to my original settings.”

Another, P6, mentioned a stranger making expensive calls:

“I accidentally left my phone—not the smartphone, but
my Razr—-a long time ago in a park...somebody actu-
ally used it to make calls, so now...with a smartphone
you have a lot more [personal data], compared to the
Razr cellphone, I’m a little paranoid about that.”

4.2.2 General Concerns
Contrasting with the majority of lock-using participants who iden-
tiﬁed speciﬁc threat models, six participants (30% of the 20 lock-
using participants) mentioned motivations that were more general.
These explanations amounted to enabling it simply because the op-
tion to do so was presented as part of their smartphone’s setup pro-
cess, social pressure from friends and/or family, or simply not see-
ing a downside to doing so.

Two of these participants (10% of 20) indicated that they began
locking their smartphones because they were prompted at setup and
otherwise would not have thought about it:

“I didn’t have that originally, but on one of the last up-
dates it like demanded it” (P11)

“I actually think that the gentleman just set it up when
he sold me the phone” (P28)

Given that these participants could not name a speciﬁc privacy
or security concern, one might expect that they would eventually
disable the security locks, if they believed that they otherwise had
no practical value. We asked participants about this and found that
P11 had been using a PIN for 12 months, the entire length of time
that she had owned a smartphone. P28, whose device was only 6
months old, indicated that he initially set it up on a previous phone
because the setup program prompted him, he then went out of his
way to set it up on his current phone out of habit.

Two other participants (10% of 20) said that they were persuaded
to use a locking mechanism by a friend or signiﬁcant other, and oth-
erwise would not have done so. That is, for some users, social in-
ﬂuence or adherence to social norms is the prime motivator, rather
than speciﬁc privacy or security concerns:

“I guess just that was suggested to be a good idea, my
girlfriend uses one” (P25)

“My friend reminded me that this was a smartphone...there
was access to lots of my accounts” (P27)

Finally, another two participants (10% of 20) indicated that they
set it up simply because they did not see a reason not to, though
could not mention any speciﬁc concerns:

“I ﬁgured since it had the feature anyway, it’s pretty
quick I guess, I might as well use it...” (P2)

“Just like, why not? I mean it was probably, I read
something about like easy tips to safeguard your phone
or something” (P7)

Our results indicate that most users actively enable locking mech-
anisms on their devices due to speciﬁc privacy and security con-
cerns, whereas a minority will do so when prompted and will con-
tinue to do so, even if they see it as a nuisance. That is, most users
see locking as a valuable feature.
4.3 Reasons for Not Locking

Eight participants chose not to lock their smartphones (29% of
28). Based on their responses to the initial question on why they
chose not to lock their devices, three non-mutually-exclusive themes
emerged: lack of motivation, convenience, and lack of concern.

The most common explanation was lack of motivation: they sim-
ply had not gotten around to setting it up, but were not averse to it.
Three participants (38% of 8) fell into this category. Though they
indicated that they would like to lock their phones, they had not
bothered to look into how to do so:

“Yeah, I thought about it.
I
mean, it’s probably something I should do, but...” (P19)

I just never bothered.

“It [current phone] said choose a password...I said,
like, remind me later.” (P23)

One participant was prompted during setup to enable locking
(P23), but postponed it and forgot. He said that he previously drew
a pattern to unlock his Android phone, but in the last month re-
ceived a warranty replacement reset to the factory settings. He

754indicated that he plans to re-enable it, and that our prompting re-
minded him. Similarly, the two other participants indicated that
they were still planning to enable locking. Thus, for over a third of
our participants who did not lock their devices, it was not a willful
decision, but an oversight. In total, twenty-three (82% of 28; 95%
CI:[0.63, 0.94]) were unopposed to locking their devices.

However, the remaining ﬁve participants who did not lock their
smartphones made deliberate decisions. These ﬁve participants all
stated that locking their devices would not be worth the effort.
Speciﬁcally, three participants (38% of 8) mentioned that the in-
convenience was too great. Two participants, P10 and P24, specif-
ically mentioned the ability for strangers to use their phones in the
case of an emergency:

“I was worried that if I got into an accident and some-
body needed to call like my girlfriend that they wouldn’t
be able to get into my phone...” (P10)

“...like if I’ve got into an accident and I couldn’t tell
them what [the lock] was or something like that” (P24)

The third participant mentioned personal experiences ﬁnding lost
phones and returning them to the owners because she was able to
browse through their contact lists. Thus, she was worried that if she
locked her own phone, it would decrease the likelihood of getting
it back if she ever lost it:

“...if I lost my phone, I trust in people enough that they
would open it up and try and get hold of someone in-
stead of stealing it. I just, I have best hopes for people
so...I just, I found a few phones, and I wouldn’t have
been able to help the person if it was locked...I’m to-
tally 50/50 split on this” (P18)

P18 was unaware that both Android and iOS include features to
help the ﬁnder of a lost phone locate the owner. Android allows
the owner to display contact information on the lock screen [9],
whereas Apple’s Find My iPhone application allows the owner to
put her device into “lost mode” from a website, which displays her
contact information on the lock screen [2]. Of course, this does not
address the issue of being able to display information during emer-
gencies. Some people have resorted to adding address book con-
tacts under the heading “ICE,” which stands for In Case of Emer-
gency [24]; several different applications have also been developed
to place this information on the lock screen. However, none of the
major smartphone platforms provide this feature by default.

Finally, two participants (25% of 8) did not believe they had any

information worth protecting:

“I’m not worried about losing my phone, or having
somebody pick up my phone and use it" (P15)

“I don’t feel like I keep anything valuable on here...there’s
nothing in here I feel like I need to protect. Yeah, if
I started having ﬁnancial information or if there was
a reason that people could get to my passwords...that
would be a reason to lock it up.” (P21)

Both of these participants claimed to regularly backup their data
and therefore were not at risk of data loss. The most sensitive data
on their devices appeared to be email, as neither had any applica-
tions that stored sensitive data (e.g., banking). Likewise, these par-
ticipants had installed a median of 14 applications, whereas the re-

maining 26 participants had installed a median of 31 applications.3
Thus, it is possible that these participants’ decisions to not lock
their devices was rational, however, it is not possible to say with
certainty without knowing whether any potentially sensitive infor-
mation is contained in their email accounts (and therefore accessi-
ble through their unlocked smartphones).
4.4 Comparison with Online Sample

To quantify why smartphone users choose or choose not to lock

their devices, we conducted a separate online survey.
4.4.1 Methodology
We commissioned a survey using Google Consumer Surveys (GCS)

that featured two multiple-choice questions. The ﬁrst question,
“What secret unlock method do you use on your smartphone?,” fea-
tured the following options:

• I don’t have a smartphone
• None (I just slide to unlock)
• PIN / Passcode / Password / Pattern
• Fingerprint
• Other

We asked participants who reported using a security lock (i.e.,
PIN, passcode, password, pattern, or ﬁngerprint), “Why did you
decide to use a locking method on your smartphone?” We provided
the following options, with instructions to select all that applied:

• Prevent strangers from using my phone
• Control when friends/family use my phone
• I’ve never thought about why I use one
• It’s easy to do
• Other people I know use a security lock
• None of the above

For participants who indicated that they did not use a security
lock, we asked, “Why did you decide not to use a locking method
on your smartphone?” We provided the following options, with
instructions to select all that applied:

• In an emergency, others can use my phone
• It’s too much of a hassle
• I’ve never thought about it
• No one would care about what’s on my phone
• None of the above

The possible answers to each question were based on the most
popular reasons for using or not using a security lock, as deter-
mined by our in-person interviews, and were not mutually-exclusive
(with the exception of “none of the above”). Overall, we received a
total of 2,518 responses from smartphone users to the ﬁrst question
(i.e., the locking method used). These responses were split roughly
60-40 in favor of locking: 1,470 respondents claimed to lock their
smartphones (58% of 2,518), whereas 1,048 respondents claimed
to not lock their smartphones (42% of 2,518).

We received 500 responses for why security locks were used and
500 responses for why security locks were not used. Thus, our anal-
ysis only focuses on these 1,000 participants. Our data included de-
mographic inferences (rather than relying on self-reporting). Gen-
der was reported for 797 of these participants (56% male), age
3The sample size of two is insufﬁcient to compare whether this
difference in medians is statistically signiﬁcant.

755Why did you decide to use a locking method?

Prevent strangers from using my phone
Control when friends/family use my phone
It’s easy to do
I’ve never thought about why I use one
Other people I know use a security lock
None of the above

273
116
102
43
41
61

168
131
97
47
101

(54.6%)
(23.2%)
(20.4%)
(8.6%)
(8.2%)
(12.2%)

(33.6%)
(26.2%)
(19.4%)
(9.4%)
(20.2%)

Why did you decide not to use a locking method?

It’s too much of a hassle
No one would care about what’s on my phone
I’ve never thought about it
In an emergency, others can use my phone
None of the above

Table 1: Responses from 500 participants to why they lock
their smartphones, as well as another 500 participants who ex-
plained why they chose not to lock their smartphones.

ranges were reported for 776 respondents (median of 35-44 years),
and income ranges were reported for 995 participants (median in-
come range of $25,000-$49,999). Finally, the vast majority of our
participants resided in urban or suburban areas (86%), while 12%
resided in rural areas. Based on these demographics, we believe
that our sample is reasonably representative of the U.S. smartphone-
using population.

4.4.2 Results
Overall, we observed that a majority of participants (55% of 500)
claimed to lock their devices to prevent unauthorized access by
strangers, whereas only 23% indicated that it was to regulate usage
by friends and family (Table 1). Of those opting not to lock their
devices, a plurality believed it was too much of a hassle (34% of
500) and 26% did not believe their devices could be used to access
sensitive data.

Our initial in-person interviews followed a grounded theory ap-
proach to uncover the different explanations for why participants
chose or chose not to lock their devices [19], whereas the goal of
our online survey was to measure how prevalent these explanations
were among the population at large. For this reason, and because
the two experiments were performed at different times, using differ-
ent methods, and on different samples, direct statistical comparison
of the two experiments would not be meaningful.

We believe these results validate the ﬁndings from our in-person
interviews, because the possible reasons that we uncovered for lock-
ing or not locking one’s smartphone were applicable to 84% of our
1,000 online survey respondents. Only 12% of those locking their
smartphones (61 of 500) and 20% of those not locking their smart-
phones (101 of 500) indicated that they did so for a reason other
than any of the ones that we provided to them.
4.5 Perceived Threats

To understand interview participants’ motivations for locking their
devices, we presented them with several scenarios involving data
compromise on their smartphones. In one scenario, we asked them
what the worst personal consequences would be if strangers gained
access to their phones and whether they thought someone could
then impersonate them. In another, we asked about professional
consequences. Finally, we asked whether they had any concerns
about the data stored on their signiﬁcant others’ smartphones.

Only one participant believed that he would not face any personal
consequences if a stranger gained access to his smartphone. The re-
maining participants fell into a handful of non-mutually-exclusive
categories, the most common of which related to online identity
theft (61% of 28). These seventeen participants cited concerns

about online account compromise, rather than someone imperson-
ating them ofﬂine. Despite us priming participants to think about
identity theft (i.e., we directly asked them about an attacker’s abil-
ity to impersonate them), only one participant made the connection
between ofﬂine and online identity. This participant mentioned that
he had a scan of his passport in his Dropbox account and was con-
cerned it could be used to steal his ofﬂine identity.

Similar to identity theft, the second most common theme related
to strangers using participants’ smartphones to impersonate them
online. Seven participants (25% of 28) speciﬁcally mentioned so-
cial networking accounts, such as a stranger being able to post
to Facebook or read previous posts. Participants were also likely
primed to this concern because they previously had gone through
their installed applications and indicated whether or not each one
required authentication. Seven participants (25% of 28) mentioned
general privacy concerns, such as knowing someone might be look-
ing through their personal photos or contacts.

We were surprised that beyond the loss of the hardware itself,
only six participants (21% of 28) raised concerns relating to ﬁnan-
cial loss. Five (18% of 28) were concerned with a stranger ac-
cessing their banking information, such as their account details via
an installed banking application, while three participants (11% of
28) were concerned that their lost phones would be used to make
purchases via applications that they had installed (e.g., Amazon,
Groupon, Starbucks, Uber, etc.).

During the beginning of each interview, we asked participants
to state their occupations. While two were unemployed and two
others were full-time students, the remaining 24 participants held
a wide variety of different occupations, which are listed in Ap-
pendix B. Eighteen participants (64% of 28) did not believe there
would be any professional consequences, and none of our partic-
ipants indicated that they would be required to report the loss to
their employers or that they risked being ﬁred. Of those concerned
about professional consequences, the most common concern was
having one’s reputation damaged by inappropriate communication
with work contacts, which was voiced by ﬁve participants (18% of
28). Three (11% of 28) were concerned about strangers seeing sen-
sitive work-related information, and another two (7%) were con-
cerned that strangers would have access to data inappropriate for
the work place, which could then be disseminated to coworkers.

Eighteen of our participants had smartphone-owning signiﬁcant
others. Of these participants, only ﬁve (28% of 18) voiced concerns
over the security of the data stored on their partner’s phone. With-
out prompting them to describe that data, three outright volunteered
that their partners stored intimate photos:

“Not my phone number so much as naked pictures...yeah
that probably wouldn’t be a good thing.” (P1)

“Besides the naked girlfriend pictures?” (P7)

“Maybe sexy pictures or something, but I don’t know
where he keeps those.” (P16)

The remaining two participants voiced concerns over sensitive
personal emails and a partner potentially jeopardizing his security
clearance. For the participants who were unconcerned, two primary
reasons emerged. Ten (77% of 13) did not believe their signiﬁcant
other stored any sensitive information and three (23% of 13) be-
lieved their signiﬁcant other was taking adequate precautions.

Overall, our interview and survey data suggest that many smart-
phone users choose not to protect their devices because they do not
believe any sensitive information is stored on them. While many of
the interview participants who did not lock their devices had fewer

756applications installed, and therefore potentially less sensitive infor-
mation, every participant’s smartphone still had access to email,
which did not require additional authentication. Thus, it is possible
that these email accounts might be a fruitful target for an attacker.

5. ACTUAL RISKS

In this section, we attempt to quantify the risks that participants
might face if their smartphones are accessed by unauthorized in-
dividuals, and how those risks compare with the risk perceptions
of our interview participants. Based on our hypothesis that some
participants undervalued the risk posed by access to email, we per-
formed an online experiment to quantify the types of sensitive in-
formation that might be found in an individual’s email account.
5.1 Email Risks

All 28 interview participants had the passwords for their primary
email addresses saved on their phones, such that an attacker with
access to the device in an unlocked state could control the owner’s
email account. Because many online services use email for pass-
word recovery, email accounts can be an overlooked attack vec-
tor for an attacker trying to gain access to other applications and
accounts. Beyond actively using a stolen email account to gain
access to other services by using it to reset their passwords, we
were curious about the types of sensitive information a motivated
attacker could ﬁnd about a victim in that victim’s email archive,
which would be searchable from a stolen device.

5.1.1 Methodology
We conducted an online survey of email users to understand the
types of sensitive information that could be found in their email ac-
counts. We recruited 1,000 participants via Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk to search through their email archives for different types of
personal information, to report how many hits their searches turned
up, to describe the contexts of the found emails, and to indicate
how surprised they were by the results. We restricted participa-
tion to those over 18 years old residing in the U.S. Our only other
screening requirement was that they needed to have successfully
completed at least 95% of their previous tasks. We used partic-
ipants’ open-ended descriptions of the found emails as a screen-
ing mechanism to detect cheating. After removing ﬁve participants
who provided gibberish or nonsensical responses to this question,
we were left with 995 legitimate responses. Because this method
could only screen out participants who reported ﬁnding sensitive
information (i.e., those claiming to be unsuccessful did not answer
this question), our results likely represent lower bounds; it is pos-
sible that some participants did not correctly perform the task and
therefore inﬂated the denominator.

We randomly assigned participants to one of nine conditions that
varied based on the data type to be searched. We asked participants
to perform most of the searches using multiple formats that we pro-
vided them. The data types and formats were as follows:

1. Social Security Number (SSN)

Format: “XXX-XX-XXXX” and “XXXXXXXXX”
2. Last 4 digits of the Social Security Number (SSN)

Format: “XXXX”

3. Bank account number
4. Last 4 digits of a bank account number

Format: “XXXX”

5. Credit card number

Format: “XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX” and “XXXX-XXXX-
XXXX-XXXX”

Condition
1. SSN (full)
2. SSN (last 4 digits)
3. Bank Account Number (full)
4. Bank Account Number (last 4 digits)
5. Credit Card Number (full)
6. Debit Card Number (full)
7. Date of Birth
8. Email Password
9. Home Address
Total (i.e., any sensitive information)

total
22 of 113
44 of 124
27 of 105
45 of 108
14 of 90
19 of 111
57 of 123
35 of 115
80 of 106
343 of 995

%
(20%)
(36%)
(26%)
(42%)
(16%)
(17%)
(46%)
(30%)
(76%)
(35%)

Table 2: Participants able to ﬁnd various types of information
in their email accounts. We randomly assigned each partici-
pant to one of nine between-subjects conditions.

6. Debit card number

Format: “XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX” and “XXXX-XXXX-
XXXX-XXXX”

Format: “MM/DD/YYYY” and “MM-DD-YYYY”

7. Date of birth

8. Email password
9. Home address

We compensated all participants $1, regardless of whether or
not their searches were successful, so as to not incentivize over-
reporting. Based on the clarity of participants’ open-ended de-
scriptions of the emails found, we saw no indication that they over-
reported results. It seems likely that this experiment may underesti-
mate the amount of sensitive information in email archives, because
it is likely that some participants may have felt uncomfortable re-
porting this information to us, despite the fact that our instructions
made clear that we did not want them to share the speciﬁc search
results with us. Thus, this is another reason why we suspect that
our results represent lower bounds on the prevalence of sensitive
information.

To assess whether locking behaviors correlated with the amount
of sensitive data found in an email account, we prefaced the survey
with a question on whether or not participants lock their smart-
phones. We used the same question and options from the Google
Consumer Survey that we discussed earlier (i.e., What secret un-
lock method do you use on your smartphone?). Unfortunately, we
did not think to add this question until after we had already re-
ceived 495 responses, and thus we only collected responses to this
question for the last 500 respondents.
5.1.2 Results
We observed that 343 participants (35% of 995) reported ﬁnding
at least one email containing the requested information (Table 2).
As would be expected, the frequency with which certain data types
were found appeared to vary inversely with the perceived sensitiv-
ity of that data: at the low end, “only” 16% of participants found
their full credit card numbers, whereas 76% reported ﬁnding their
home addresses.

We performed Fisher’s exact test to examine whether partici-
pants with unlocked smartphones were more or less at risk than
those with locked smartphones. We observed a statistically signiﬁ-
cant difference: 38% of those using locks found sensitive informa-
tion in their email accounts, whereas 27% of those not locking their
smartphones found sensitive information (p < 0.010; two-tailed).
While signiﬁcant, the effect size is small (Cramer’s V = 0.123). In
addition to more lock-using participants ﬁnding sensitive informa-
tion, a Mann-Whitney U test indicated they also found signiﬁcantly
more of it (U = 23, 340.5, p < 0.009).

757Many participants reported being surprised by their ﬁndings. We
performed a Pearson correlation between participants’ self-reported
surprise assessment (reported using a 5-point Likert scale, from ex-
pected many more to expected many fewer) and the number of hits
their searches yielded and found a positive correlation (r = 0.14,
p < 0.0005). Likewise, a Mann-Whitney U test of the surprise
assessments between those who found any hits and those who did
not was also statistically signiﬁcant (U = 98, 735.5, p < 0.001).

Thus, over a third of our participants found sensitive data in
their email accounts, which was surprising to them, and those lock-
ing their smartphones were more likely to ﬁnd sensitive data. Of
course, these results say nothing about causality; we do not know
if participants choose to lock their phones because they know that
more sensitive data can be found in their email accounts (accessi-
ble from their phones), or if participants are more willing to send
sensitive data via email because they lock their phones. It is also
possible that some or all of this effect could be simply due to prim-
ing: participants who acknowledged not locking their phones may
have felt a need to under-report. Regardless of the reason, it is
still disconcerting that of those who do not lock their devices, 19%
found full bank account numbers, 33% found email passwords, and
46% found dates of birth.

This is particularly troubling when considering the authentica-
tion requirements of many smartphone applications that store sen-
sitive data, such as the payment, shopping and banking applications
that many of our interview participants had installed. While these
applications require additional authentication, which participants
cited as a reason for their lack of concern, in many cases the authen-
tication can be circumvented when an attacker has access to email.
Passwords to Groupon, Amazon, and Uber accounts, which protect
a user’s ﬁnancial information and physical address, can be reset via
email. PayPal and eBay require a full credit/debit card number and
the answers to two security questions in order to change a pass-
word: our online survey suggests that an attacker would be able to
locate a credit/debit card number in a victim’s email account around
17% of the time, while Schechter et al. showed that guessing the
answers to security questions is often quite easy [30]. Similarly,
with knowledge of the username (often saved on the applications’
home screens), the passwords for Bank of America and Fidelity can
be reset via email. Without knowing the username, the passwords
for Wells Fargo, Chase and Fidelity can be reset with two of the fol-
lowing four pieces of information: account number (found in 26%
of email accounts),4 birthdate (found in 46% of email accounts),
credit/debit card number (found in 16-17% of email accounts), or
Social Security Number (found in 20% of email accounts).

6. DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss how our experiment compares with
related work, ways in which more users could be motivated to lock
their smartphones, whether it is rational to expect all users to lock
their phones, the limitations of our experiments, and we conclude
with future work.
6.1 Comparison with Related Work

As discussed in Section 2, Harbach et al. also performed an ex-
periment to examine users’ motivations for locking (or not locking)
their smartphones [21]. Because our experiments were performed
at different times, using different samples, and used different sur-
vey instruments and interview guides, we cannot make a direct
statistical comparison. However, at a high level, we believe our

4For users with multiple bank accounts, the probability of ﬁnding
the one being reset is obviously lower.

experiments are complementary. Harbach et al. performed an in-
depth ﬁeld study on the likelihood of one particular threat model
occurring—shoulder surﬁng. They also noted that “no participant
mentioned protecting login credentials or logged-in accounts di-
rectly.” We expanded upon this by asking participants about the
types of sensitive data that could be found in their email accounts
(Section 5). We observed that indeed this is a serious threat, as
many participants were able to ﬁnd data ranging from passwords to
bank account numbers. Thus, while Harbach et al. observed that
there are situations in which users have sensitive data displayed on
their devices upon which others may eavesdrop, we show that a de-
vice falling into the wrong hands may yield even greater violations
of privacy and other security-related consequences.

Our studies also corroborate each other. For instance, we found
that despite being viewed as a nuisance, many users continue to
lock their devices because they believe that the beneﬁts outweigh
the costs. Harbach et al. observed that 47% of their online partic-
ipants stated that unlocking their phones was annoying, yet con-
tinued to use an locking mechanism, whereas 40% of our lock-
using interview participants also said that it was a nuisance (despite
continuing to use it). Supplementing the answers to this question
with open-ended followup during the in-person interviews helped
to shed additional light on participants’ motivations. For instance,
we observed that almost every participant had some experience
with the theft or loss of a device, either ﬁrst or secondhand. As we
will discuss in the next section, the opportunity to ask open-ended
followup questions during interviews allowed us to propose new
strategies to encourage more people to enable locking mechanisms
on their mobile devices.

Where our studies diverge is with regard to conclusions. Harbach
et al. concluded that because “unlocks are perceived as unneces-
sary in private environments and sensitive data is seldom accessed,
we suggest that more effort should be put into researching how to
decrease the number of unlocks by deploying usable context- and
content-dependent locking mechanisms” [21]. Through our qual-
itative interviews and our online quantitative survey, we observed
that roughly a quarter of our participants chose to lock their devices
in order to regulate when friends and family accessed them. For
these participants, the primary threat model stemmed from these
private environments. Thus, the decision of whether or not a device
should be locked at any given moment is likely to extend beyond
context and the content to be displayed on the device’s screen, but
also needs to consider the user’s personal privacy preferences and
the data stored on—or accessible through—the device.

6.2 Improving Uptake

Assuming that locking one’s smartphone is a “good” security
behavior, how can we motivate more people to do so? Given the
millions of people in the U.S. using smartphones, the 29% of inter-
view participants (and 42% of GCS respondents) not locking their
smartphones represent a large number of users who may be expos-
ing themselves to threats unnecessarily. Based on the GCS data, a
large minority of users do not lock their devices because they do
not believe it is worth the effort (34% of 500). We believe that the
majority can be motivated through simple design changes to mobile
platforms and education.

Our GCS data indicated that 26% of users do not lock their de-
vices because they do not believe that they have any data worth
protecting. Our email experiment rebuts this: 35% of our par-
ticipants were able to ﬁnd sensitive data stored in their email ac-
counts, which an attacker could easily access on an unlocked smart-
phone. None of our interview participants—regardless of locking
behavior—made a connection between the sensitive data that might

758be stored in an email account and the ability to access that data
through their smartphone, and therefore it is likely that those claim-
ing to not have any sensitive data stored on their smartphones were
not making this connection either. We believe that some aware-
ness could be achieved by better messaging. For instance, sev-
eral participants indicated that a customer service representative
initially helped them setup their smartphones; during this process,
the representative could point out that any information contained
in their email archives could be viewed by anyone who possesses
their smartphone. Likewise, due to network effects, email providers
have a strong incentive for mobile users to prevent unauthorized ac-
cess to email accounts. The providers could enforce this by using
existing technologies: for instance, Microsoft’s Exchange allows
an administrator to specify a minimum security policy (e.g., using
a PIN of a certain length, a ﬁnite number of failed unlocks, etc.)
with which mobile devices must comply in order to access email.
One in ﬁve of our GCS respondents claimed to not lock their
smartphones simply because the idea had not occurred to them.
These are not users who are opposed to locking. As we observed
during our interviews, several participants locked their devices not
because of speciﬁc concerns, but because they were asked about
it during device setup. These participants continued to lock their
devices long after. This suggests that inertia plays a role in the use
of locking mechanisms: those who use them tend to continue to do
so, even if they cannot cite a speciﬁc reason why, while many who
do not simply do so because they were never asked. Platform de-
signers could likely get more users to lock their devices by simply
asking them if they would like to do so as part of the setup process.
This could work on an opt-out basis (e.g., the setup process could
require them to set it up, but allow them to visit a settings panel to
disable it at a later time), or it could allow them to skip setting it
up, but may ask them again in the future.

Finally, we observed that almost 10% of users do not lock their
devices because they are worried that emergency personnel might
not be able to use their smartphones to notify loved ones. As we
noted earlier, applications exist to address this concern by display-
ing this information on a device’s lock screen. Platform designers
could directly address this concern by building this feature into the
platform, and make it conﬁgurable during device setup, so as to
make its existence clear to users.

6.3 Rational Rejection?

Our email experiment showed that those who did not lock their
phones were able to ﬁnd signiﬁcantly less sensitive information in
their email accounts; only 27% reported locating sensitive informa-
tion, as compared to the 38% who locked their smartphones. We
also observed that 34% of our GCS respondents did not believe that
their devices contained data that would be interesting to others, and
therefore opted to not lock them. We do not know where the union
of these two sets lies: for instance, it is possible that the 34% who
do not believe their devices store sensitive data are entirely correct.
If this is the case, the rejection of locking mechanisms may be a ra-
tional decision for them. For instance, Herley observed that some
security advice that experts give to users is irrational once one com-
pares the value of the resources being protected against the cost of
users’ time to protect it [23]. In this case, it is possible that many
users are correct to not lock their devices because the effort to do
so would far exceed the value of the data being protected. Taken
as a whole, the time spent unlocking a smartphone is likely non-
trivial. For instance, Harbach et al. empirically showed that in 27
days, their participants spent an average of over an hour each just
unlocking their devices [21].

Locking one’s device may not be a one-size-ﬁts-all security prac-
tice. That is, while many users are likely to beneﬁt from the prac-
tice, this may not be universal. Instead, systems need to be designed
to accommodate some amount of nuance with regard to security
policies, weighing user needs with risks.
6.4 Limitations

Like all human subjects experiments, our participants were lim-
ited to those willing to participate. While the demographics from
our online samples were representative of the U.S. Internet-using
population, we did notice that our interview sample had a deﬁcit
of highly skilled professionals. None of our interview participants
reported storing sensitive work-related documents on their smart-
phones. We suspect that this may have had an effect on the gen-
eralizability of our results. For instance, doctors, lawyers, and
tech workers might have more sensitive information stored on their
smartphones and email accounts (and may or may not take addi-
tional precautions to protect that information). However, we be-
lieve that any bias here is limited, as highly skilled professionals
make up a small proportion of the total population.

Likewise, we also observed that few of our interview participants
were parents. We suspect that parents would be likely to have pho-
tographs or other sensitive information about their children on their
devices, and might therefore have greater concerns about a stranger
accessing such photographs or information on a stolen smartphone.
Our interviews and online survey relied on self-reported data.
The email search task was self-reported because we could not eth-
ically inspect the email accounts of others in order to measure the
prevalence of sensitive information. We designed this experiment
so that the same incentive was provided regardless of outcome, and
therefore we believe that if there was a bias, it was in favor of under-
reporting. Thus, we believe that the numbers we report on risks are
likely lower bounds.
6.5 Conclusions

We examined why smartphone users choose or choose not to use
a security lock on their phones. We followed this study up with an
online survey to examine how our results generalize to the larger
U.S. population. We observed that all of our participants use their
devices to check their email accounts, regardless of whether or not
they choose to lock their devices, and so we performed another on-
line experiment to quantify the frequency with which sensitive in-
formation could be obtained via an email account. Based on these
experiments, we offered design suggestions to help platforms in-
crease the number of users who use a security lock on their smart-
phones and to better communicate some of these risks to end users.
However, we believe that future work is still needed to validate
these suggestions.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was made possible by Intel through the ISTC for Se-
cure Computing and NSF award number CNS-1318680. We thank
Cormac Herley for his feedback, as well as Refjohürs Lykkewe.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Andriotis, P., Tryfonas, T., Oikonomou, G., and Yildiz, C. A

pilot study on the security of pattern screen-lock methods
and soft side channel attacks. In Proceedings of the Sixth
ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and
Mobile Networks, WiSec ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2013), 1–6.

[2] Apple, Inc. Find My iPhone, 2014. http:

//www.apple.com/icloud/find-my-iphone.html.

759[3] Aviv, A. J., Gibson, K., Mossop, E., Blaze, M., and Smith,

J. M. Smudge attacks on smartphone touch screens. In
Proceedings of the 4th USENIX Conference on Offensive
Technologies, WOOT’10, USENIX Association (Berkeley,
CA, USA, 2010), 1–7.

[4] Aviv, A. J., Sapp, B., Blaze, M., and Smith, J. M. Practicality

of accelerometer side channels on smartphones. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference, ACSAC ’12, ACM (New York,
NY, USA, 2012), 41–50.

[5] Becher, M., Freiling, F. C., Hoffmann, J., Holz, T.,

Uellenbeck, S., and Wolf, C. Mobile security catching up?
revealing the nuts and bolts of the security of mobile devices.
In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, SP ’11, IEEE Computer Society (Washington, DC,
USA, 2011), 96–111.

[6] Bonneau, J., Herley, C., Oorschot, P. C. v., and Stajano, F.

The quest to replace passwords: A framework for
comparative evaluation of web authentication schemes. In
Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, SP ’12, IEEE Computer Society (Washington, DC,
USA, 2012), 553–567.

[7] Bonneau, J., Preibusch, S., and Anderson, R. A birthday

present every eleven wallets? The security of
customer-chosen banking PINs. In FC ’12: Proceedings of
the the Sixteenth International Conference on Financial
Cryptography (March 2012).

[8] Boyles, J. L., Smith, A., and Madden, M. Privacy and data

management on mobile devices, September 5 2012.
http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/09/05/
privacy-and-data-management-on-mobile-devices/.

[9] Broida, R. How to improve your chances of recovering a lost

android phone, February 20 2013.
http://www.pcworld.com/article/2028782/.

[10] Chiang, H.-Y., and Chiasson, S. Improving user

authentication on mobile devices: A touchscreen graphical
password. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Human-computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services, MobileHCI ’13, ACM (New York,
NY, USA, 2013), 251–260.

[11] Chin, E., Felt, A. P., Sekar, V., and Wagner, D. Measuring

user conﬁdence in smartphone security and privacy. In
Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security, ACM (2012), 1.

[12] De Luca, A., Hang, A., Brudy, F., Lindner, C., and

Hussmann, H. Touch me once and i know it’s you!: Implicit
authentication based on touch screen patterns. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’12, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2012), 987–996.

[13] De Luca, A., Harbach, M., von Zezschwitz, E., Maurer,

M.-E., Slawik, B. E., Hussmann, H., and Smith, M. Now you
see me, now you don’t: Protecting smartphone authentication
from shoulder surfers. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’14, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 2937–2946.

[14] De Luca, A., von Zezschwitz, E., Nguyen, N. D. H., Maurer,

M.-E., Rubegni, E., Scipioni, M. P., and Langheinrich, M.
Back-of-device authentication on smartphones. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2013), 2389–2398.

[15] Duggan, M. Cell phone activities 2013, September 19 2013.

http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/19/
cell-phone-activities-2013/.

[16] Dunphy, P., Heiner, A. P., and Asokan, N. A closer look at

recognition-based graphical passwords on mobile devices. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and
Security, SOUPS ’10, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010),
3:1–3:12.

[17] Fox, S. 51% of u.s. adults bank online, August 7 2013.

http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/08/07/
51-of-u-s-adults-bank-online/.

[18] Frank, M., Biedert, R., Ma, E., Martinovic, I., and Song, D.
Touchalytics: On the applicability of touchscreen input as a
behavioral biometric for continuous authentication.
Information Forensics and Security, IEEE Transactions on 8,
1 (Jan 2013), 136–148.

[19] Glaser, B. G., and Strauss, A. L. The Discovery of Grounded

Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine
Publishing Company, Chicago, 1967.

[20] Hang, A., von Zezschwitz, E., De Luca, A., and Hussmann,

H. Too much information!: User attitudes towards
smartphone sharing. In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense
Through Design, NordiCHI ’12, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2012), 284–287.

[21] Harbach, M., von Zezschwitz, E., Fichtner, A., Luca, A. D.,

and Smith, M. It’s a hard lock life: A ﬁeld study of
smartphone (un)locking behavior and risk perception. In
Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2014),
USENIX Association (Menlo Park, CA, July 2014),
213–230.

[22] Hayashi, E., Riva, O., Strauss, K., Brush, A., and Schechter,

S. Goldilocks and the two mobile devices: going beyond
all-or-nothing access to a device’s applications. In
Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security, ACM (2012), 2.

[23] Herley, C. So long, and no thanks for the externalities: the

rational rejection of security advice by users. In New Security
Paradigms Workshop (2009), 133–144.

[24] Hitti, M. Put ‘ice’ on your cell phone. WebMD Health News,

October 16 2006. http://www.webmd.com/news/
20061016/put-ice-on-your-cell-phone.

[25] Karlson, A. K., Brush, A., and Schechter, S. Can i borrow
your phone?: understanding concerns when sharing mobile
phones. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (2009), 1647–1650.

[26] Lookout. Mobile lost & found: Your phone’s favorite hiding

places, March 22 2012.
https://blog.lookout.com/blog/2012/03/22/.
[27] Riva, O., Qin, C., Strauss, K., and Lymberopoulos, D.

Progressive authentication: deciding when to authenticate on
mobile phones. In Proceedings of the 21st USENIX Security
Symposium (2012).

[28] Sae-Bae, N., Ahmed, K., Isbister, K., and Memon, N.

Biometric-rich gestures: A novel approach to authentication
on multi-touch devices. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’12, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2012), 977–986.
[29] Schaub, F., Walch, M., Könings, B., and Weber, M.

Exploring the design space of graphical passwords on
smartphones. In Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium on

760Usable Privacy and Security, SOUPS ’13, ACM (New York,
NY, USA, 2013), 11:1–11:14.

Do you own a smartphone?
Have you been using it for at least 6 months?

If you answered “yes” to both questions, then you may be eligible
to participate in a study that looks at how people use smartphones!

The study involves meeting a UC Berkeley researcher for an inter-
view in a public place (i.e., a Starbuck’s near the Berkeley BART).
During the interview, you’ll answer questions about the apps you
have installed on your phone, the activities you typically use your
phone for, and how you use various features on your phone.

The interview will take less than an hour. Participants will receive
a $35 Visa gift card for participating in the study.

To be eligible for this study, you must:
-Be over 18
-Have owned a smartphone for at least 6 months

Please ﬁll out the following survey and we will contact you if you
qualify: [URL to the screening survey on SurveyGizmo]

B. PARTICIPANTS’ OCCUPATIONS

Our 28 interview participants reported holding the following oc-

cupations or working in the following industries:

• Audio engineer
• Student (x2)
• Customer service (x3)
• Healthcare (x3)
• Vendor management
• Publishing
• Financial analyst
• Program coordinator
• Unemployed (x2)
• Teacher
• Journalist (x2)
• Librarian and research assistant
• Retail manager
• City government
• Assistant to stage manager at theater
• Writer (x2)
• Volunteer at hospital
• Startup
• Proof reader
• Professional organizing

[30] Schechter, S., Brush, A. B., and Egelman, S. It’s no secret.
measuring the security and reliability of authentication via.
In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, IEEE Computer Society (Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
2009), 375–390.

[31] Serwadda, A., and Phoha, V. V. When kids’ toys breach
mobile phone security. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer & Communications
Security, CCS ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2013),
599–610.

[32] Simon, L., and Anderson, R. Pin skimmer: Inferring pins

through the camera and microphone. In Proceedings of the
Third ACM Workshop on Security and Privacy in
Smartphones & Mobile Devices, SPSM ’13, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2013), 67–78.

[33] Starr, C., Rudman, R., and Whipple, C. Philosophical basis

for risk analysis. Annual Review of Energy 1 (November
1976), 629–662.

[34] Takada, T., and Kokubun, Y. Extended pin authentication
scheme allowing multi-touch key input. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Advances in Mobile Computing
& Multimedia, MoMM ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2013), 307:307–307:310.

[35] Uellenbeck, S., Dürmuth, M., Wolf, C., and Holz, T.

Quantifying the security of graphical passwords: The case of
android unlock patterns. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer & Communications
Security, CCS ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2013),
161–172.

[36] Van Bruggen, D., Liu, S., Kajzer, M., Striegel, A., Crowell,

C. R., and D’Arcy, J. Modifying smartphone user locking
behavior. In Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium on Usable
Privacy and Security, SOUPS ’13, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2013), 10:1–10:14.

[37] Von Zezschwitz, E., Dunphy, P., and De Luca, A. Patterns in

the wild: a ﬁeld study of the usability of pattern and
pin-based authentication on mobile devices. In Proceedings
of the 15th international conference on Human-computer
interaction with mobile devices and services, ACM (2013),
261–270.

[38] von Zezschwitz, E., Koslow, A., De Luca, A., and

Hussmann, H. Making graphic-based authentication secure
against smudge attacks. In Proceedings of the 2013
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI
’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2013), 277–286.

[39] Wright, S. The symantec smartphone honey stick project.

Tech. rep., Symantec, 2012.

[40] Zhao, Z., Ahn, G.-J., Seo, J.-J., and Hu, H. On the security of

picture gesture authentication. In Proceedings of the 22Nd
USENIX Conference on Security, SEC’13, USENIX
Association (Berkeley, CA, USA, 2013), 383–398.

APPENDIX
A. RECRUITMENT ADVERTISEMENT

To recruit our 28 interview participants, we posted the following

advertisement to the Craigslist Bay Area “et cetera jobs” forum:

Subject: Smartphone owners - participate in a study!

761