Vulnerability and Protection of Channel State Information

in Multiuser MIMO Networks

Yu-Chih Tung, Sihui Han, Dongyao Chen, and Kang G. Shin

The University of Michigan

Email: {yctung,sihuihan,chendy,kgshin}@umich.edu

ABSTRACT

Multiple-In-Multiple-Out (MIMO) offers great potential for in-
creasing network capacity by exploiting spatial diversity with mul-
tiple antennas. Multiuser MIMO (MU-MIMO) further enables Ac-
cess Points (APs) with multiple antennas to transmit multiple data
streams concurrently to several clients. In MU-MIMO, clients need
to estimate Channel State Information (CSI) and report it to APs
in order to eliminate interference between them. We explore the
vulnerability in clients’ plaintext feedback of estimated CSI to the
APs and propose two advanced attacks that malicious clients can
mount by reporting forged CSI: (1) snifﬁng attack that enables con-
currently transmitting malicious clients to eavesdrop other ongoing
transmissions; (2) power attack that enables malicious clients to en-
hance their own capacity at the expense of others’. We have imple-
mented and evaluated these two attacks in a WARP testbed. Based
on our experimental results, we suggest a revision of the current
CSI feedback scheme and propose a novel CSI feedback system,
called the CSIsec, to prevent CSI forging without requiring any
modiﬁcation at the client side, thus facilitating its deployment.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Security and Pro-
tection
Keywords
Multiuser MIMO Networks; Physical Security; Channel State In-
formation
1.

INTRODUCTION

Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) has the potential for
solving the problem of insufﬁcient bandwidth in WLANs, and has
already been included in several wireless standards, such as IEEE
802.11n/ac [6, 45]. By exploiting spatial diversity, a transmitter
with multiple antennas can either use its antennas to transmit the
same stream to achieve power gain for the enhancement of the re-
ceiver’s SNR or enable concurrent transmission of multiple (differ-
ent) streams to achieve multiplexing gain. Moreover, to realize the
potential beneﬁt of multiple antennas, 802.11ac supports the mul-
tiuser MIMO (MU-MIMO) mode, in which multiple clients can be
served concurrently without interfering with each other, achieving
multiplexing gain even for those clients with a single antenna.

A key component in all MIMO technologies is Channel State In-
formation (CSI). Due to the multipaths a wireless signal takes, the
received signal is actually a combination of different, delayed and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS’14, November 3–7, 2014, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2957-6/14/11 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660270.

(a) Genuine CSI feedback ﬂow (b) Forged CSI feedback ﬂow

Figure 1—Attack models based on forged CSI.

attenuated copies of each sent signal, and CSI can be regarded as
the coefﬁcient of this combination. This information is critical to
MIMO networks since it is used by transmitters to precode signals
either for boosting received signal strength at a client or removing
interference to the other clients. Researchers have also shown that
the network capacity can be improved via transmission with known
CSI [38]. Note that only receivers know the CSI from transmitters
to themselves, which is estimated by using a pre-deﬁned known se-
quence. For example, in downlink transmission, only clients know
their own CSI from the Access Point (AP) to themselves, which is
estimated by dividing the received signal by the known sequence,
and the clients are responsible for feeding back this information to
the AP for precoding messages as shown in Fig. 1(a). Moreover, the
freshness of CSI is critical to the performance of wireless networks,
as stale CSI does not represent the current state of multi-path fad-
ing and may result in precoding errors. In MU-MIMO networks,
when the CSI feedback delay is greater than 200ms, the achievable
network capacity decreases by more than 50% [4]. Thus, receivers
are required to report CSI in plaintext as quickly as possible.

We uncover the vulnerability caused by this plaintext CSI feed-
back, and propose two advanced attacks in MU-MIMO networks
with forged CSI. As shown in Fig. 1(b), we assume malicious clients
can ﬁrst sniff other clients’ CSI, modify/fabricate and then report it.
In general, clients have no incentive to report a wrong estimation of
CSI, as it does nothing but decreases its own received signal-to-
interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR). However, in MU-MIMO net-
works, data can be transmitted to multiple clients concurrently who
share the same wireless medium, and hence, clients can intention-
ally mislead the precoding process at the transmitter by reporting
forged CSI for malicious purposes. Based on this observation, we
ﬁrst introduce a potential threat, called the snifﬁng attack, which
enables a client to eavesdrop packets sent to others even under the
protection of physical security which is theoretically proven to be
immune to eavesdropping [12, 24]. The other potential threat we
identiﬁed is the power attack, which manipulates the AP’s power
allocation to antennas based on the reported (forged) CSI. By re-
porting forged CSI, a client can receive a favorable power alloca-
tion for its own transmission. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to discover, implement, and prove the possibility of ma-
licious attacks on the MU-MIMO precoding process by reporting
forged CSI. These attacks are very different from the others pro-
posed before [14, 23, 32] — which also provide wrong metrics to
fool systems — in that ours actively exploits the precoding proce-
dure by forging CSI which is unique in MU-MIMO networks. The

CSI (h11,h12) CSI (h21,h22) Known sequence CSI (h11,h12) Forged CSI (f21,f22) Known sequence CSI (h11,h12) CSI (h21,h22) Known sequence CSI (h11,h12) Forged CSI (f21,f22) Known sequence 775vulnerabilities caused by forging CSI are expected to become a crit-
ical issue as MU-MIMO is becoming popular and deployed widely;
it is thus important to prevent such attacks before they become ram-
pant.

We propose CSIsec to protect existing MU-MIMO networks
from the attacks with forged CSI. CSIsec is a novel CSI feedback
system in which transmitters send a “cheated” known sequence in-
stead of the genuine known sequence to mislead the CSI estima-
tion process at clients before they forge CSI. Using this approach,
no clients can estimate their own CSI correctly, and it is also im-
possible to know CSI of another client because even that client
doesn’t know its own CSI. Under CSIsec the transmitter is the
only one who knows the CSI estimated at clients, and this infor-
mation is acquired through a process similar to Difﬁe-Hellman key
exchange [10].
It is important to note that CSIsec requires no
modiﬁcation at clients, and hence it provides backward compatibil-
ity and can be easily applied to existing systems. We also suggest
adding randomization in existing MU-MIMO mechanisms to disin-
centivize clients from reporting forged feedback under CSIsec.

We implement the attack models and CSIsec in a WARP testbed
[20], and validate that by reporting forged CSI, a client can success-
fully decode packets destined for other clients with less than 2% bit-
error-rate (BER) on average even with physical security enabled.
On the other hand, a client can also acquire an unfairly higher ca-
pacity (by 20%) only by reporting forged CSI.

This paper makes the following three main contributions:

• The ﬁrst exploration of potential threats in MU-MIMO precoding

process caused by reporting forged CSI;

• Implementation and proof of the possibility of snifﬁng and power

attacks in a real testbed; and

• Development of CSIsec, a novel CSI feedback system that does
not require modiﬁcations of clients but can prevent clients from
forging CSI.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
brieﬂy introduces the principles of physical security in MU-MIMO
networks and presents our attack model. Two plausible attacks are
illustrated in Sections 3 and 4, respectively. Section 5 describes
our implementation setting and presents our experimental evalua-
tion. The countermeasures are discussed in Section 6 while Section
7 summarizes related work. We discuss future directions and con-
clude the paper in Sections 8 and 9.
2. BACKGROUND AND SYSTEM MODEL

MU-MIMO networks [6] are an emerging communication tech-
nology for next-generation wireless communications thanks to their
potential for enhancing receivers’ capacity, even when each receiver
is equipped with a single antenna. Security in MU-MIMO is a must
since multiple receivers/clients are served concurrently, implying
that malicious behavior of even a single client can affect the trans-
mission of all others.
Instead of ensuring security by traditional
cryptosystems, physical security has been studied widely to thwart
eavesdroppers [3, 12, 13] because of its guarantee of high secu-
rity at a relatively low cost in MIMO networks [9]. In this section,
we ﬁrst introduce basic MU-MIMO techniques and the state-of-art
physical layer security in MU-MIMO networks, and then illustrate
our attack model.

In what follows, we use upper-case boldface letters to represent
matrices while using lower-case boldface for vectors. XT stands for
the transpose of X and X∗ for the conjugate transpose of X. (cid:107)xk(cid:107)
represents the norm of a vector xk and |xij| represents the absolute
value of a matrix element xij.

2.1 Beamforming in MU-MIMO

T, h2

Consider a MU-MIMO system with one transmitter (the AP)
with N antennas, and M receivers (clients), each with a single an-
tenna. The downlink CSI from the transmitter’s j-th antenna to the
i-th receiver is characterized by a single frequency-domain com-
plex coefﬁcient hij. Therefore, the full CSI can be represented by an
M × N matrix H = [h1
T ]T where the i-th row vector
hi represents the CSI of the link from the transmitter’s N antennas
to the i-th receiver. In 802.11n/ac, data is modulated into different
subcarriers based on Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing
(OFDM) in which each individual Hk is used to represent the CSI
of the k-th subcarrier. To keep the model succinct, we ignore the
subscript k, and it can be easily extended to the multiple-subcarrier
case by treating each Hk independently. Thus, the received signal y
of transmitted signal x can be expressed as:

T, . . . , hM

1, σ2

y = Hx + n,

(1)
where the N × 1 vector x = [x1, x2, . . . , xN]T represents the signals
sent from the transmitter’s N antennas, the M × 1 vector y = [y1,
y2, . . . , yM]T represents the signals received at the M concurrent
receivers, and n = [n1, n2, . . . , nM]T represents an additive white
Gaussian noise with variances σ2

2, . . . , σ2
M.

Unlike single-user MIMO (SU-MIMO), the i-th receiver in a
MU-MIMO system doesn’t have knowledge of signals yk,k(cid:54)=i re-
ceived at other receivers, so the received data cannot be jointly
decoded. Thus, a precoding phase at the transmitter before send-
ing the signal is necessary in MU-MIMO networks. Researchers
have proven the optimality of Dirty Paper Coding (DPC) [8, 41] in
MU-MIMO. However, the implementation of DPC incurs signiﬁ-
cant additional complexity, making it unsuitable for wireless proto-
cols. Thus, we will instead focus on linear precoding schemes like
zero-forcing beamforming (ZF-BF), where the received signals are
expressed as:

y = Hx + n = HCm + n

(2)
where m = [m1, m2, . . . , mM]T is an M × 1 vector representing the
messages clients expect to receive. For example, mi is the message
that the i-th receiver expects. C is the N × M precoding matrix
where ck represents the k-th column of matrix C. In this scheme,
Cm represents the precoded signals being sent from the transmit-
ter’s N antennas and meets the power constraint (cid:107)Cm(cid:107) < P, where
P is the total transmit power. After precoding, the received SINR at
the i-th receiver is:

SINRmi = log(

(3)

i +(cid:80)

σ2

(cid:107)hicimi(cid:107)2
k(cid:54)=i (cid:107)hkckmk(cid:107)2 )

where (cid:107)hicimi(cid:107)2 represents the magnitude of message mi that the
i-th receiver expects to receive and (cid:107)hkckmk(cid:107)2 represents the inter-
ference caused by messages sent to other receivers in the same con-
current transmission. The main idea of ZF-BF is to nullify the in-
terference caused by other concurrently transmitted messages, and
channel inversion [12] is proven to be the optimal precoding matrix
to ensure zero interference, i.e., C = H† = H∗(H∗H)

−1 and

y = HH∗

(H∗H)

−1m + n = m + n,

(4)
indicating that the i-th receiver can receive its own message mi with-
out any interference from other concurrently transmitted messages.
A 2× 2 example of ZF-BF (i.e., N = 2, M = 2) is shown in Fig. 2,
where the precoded message of m1 can be visualized as a vector
being steered along the direction orthogonal to h2, thus causing no
interference at rx2, i.e., h2(c1m1) = 0.

776Figure 2—Zero-forcing beamforming. rx2 receives zero interfer-
ence from m1 because the precoded c1m1 is in the null space of
h2. On the other hand, m1 is decodable at rx1 because c1m1 is not
orthogonal to h1

2.2 Physical-Layer Security in MU-MIMO

As shown in Eq. (4), in ZF-BF, each receiver only receives the
message sent to itself without knowledge of concurrently transmit-
ted data to other receivers. Thus, it is proven to be not leaking
information to other concurrent receivers in terms of physical secu-
rity [12, 24]. To prevent other eavesdroppers from snifﬁng the con-
current transmission, artiﬁcial noise is introduced to mislead poten-
tial eavesdroppers [13]. Usually, the artiﬁcial noise is transmitted
in the null space of H to avoid interference to concurrent receivers.
It has been shown experimentally that artiﬁcial noise can ensure
eavesdroppers to have 15dB lower SNR than the signal at the in-
tended receiver if the eavesdroppers and the intended receiver are a
half wireless wavelength apart [3]. A toy example of this physical
security is shown in Fig. 3(a), where h1 and h2 are the CSI of rx1
and rx2 which are the intended receivers of messages m1 and m2,
respectively, and h3 is the CSI of rx3 which is not in the concurrent
transmission. We assume rx2 and rx3 are both eavesdroppers who
are trying to decode the message sent to rx1 with physical security
enabled. Since in the precoding phase, message m1 is projected as
c1m1 in the space orthogonal to h2, rx2 cannot receive any infor-
mation about m1 because the projection of c1m1 onto h2 is zero.
Moreover, because an artiﬁcial noise is transmitted, rx3 is unlikely
to be able to decode m1 since the projection of sent artiﬁcial noise
onto h3 is not 0. Thus, this example demonstrates the capability of
physical security to thwart eavesdroppers.

Physical security like this has been proposed to thwart eaves-
droppers without encryption. The overhead of keeping data con-
ﬁdential this way is minimal in MU-MIMO because all necessary
computations are done in wireless communication chips, and no
decoding procedure is required at clients. Some researchers even
claim that this protocol can provide better security due to the diver-
sity of CSI [9]. However, all of these assume perfect CSI fed back
by clients, and we will next introduce a threat model based on this
assumption.

2.3 General Attack Model

The proposed attacks are demonstrated in a 2 × 2 MU-MIMO
system as shown in Fig. 2, consisting of one 2-antenna AP and two
1-antenna clients for simplicity. We focus on the downlink trans-
mission because downlink CSI is unknown to the transmitter and
it needs to be fed back by the receivers. Here, we focus on ex-
plicit CSI feedback since implicit CSI feedback relying on channel
reciprocity has been abandoned in 802.11ac. Moreover, we assume
malicious clients are able to report forged CSI, and the packets pre-
coded by ZF-BF are concurrently sent to two clients, rx1 and rx2.
In the scenario of physical security, transmitters use additional an-
tennas to send artiﬁcial noise, and there exists one additional eaves-
dropper, rx3, not in the concurrent transmission as shown in Fig. 3.

(a) Physical security in ZF-BF

(b) When CSI is forged

Figure 3—How forged CSI works. Dashed lines represent the
signals sent by transmit antennas and solid lines represent the CSI.
When CSI is forged, the precoded signal c1m1 is no longer orthog-
onal to h2.

The setting can easily be extended to more complicated systems
with more antennas. Under this setting, the 2 × 2 MU-MIMO sys-
tem model can be represented as:

(cid:18)y1

(cid:19)

y2

(cid:18)h11

h21

=

(cid:19)(cid:18)c11

c21

h12
h22

(cid:19)(cid:18)√

c12
c22

p1m1√
p2m2

(cid:19)

(cid:18)n1

(cid:19)

n2

+

,

(5)

where y1, y2 are their received signals at receivers; m1, m2 are the
messages sent for rx1 and rx2; and hij represents the channel coef-
ﬁcient (CSI) from the j-th transmitter antenna to the i-th receiver.
Since the transmitter precodes the sent message based on ZF-BF,
the precoding matrix C is set to H−1, and thus the received mes-
sage at rxi is yi =
pimi + ni where pi represents the power co-
efﬁcient used to control the magnitude of sent message mi where
messages are assumed as constant-modulus signals, i.e., |mi| = 1.
Since the AP’s total power is ﬁxed, the transmit power allocation

√

must satisfy:(cid:80)N

i=1 (cid:107)ci(cid:107)2pi < P.

Without loss of generality, we assume the second client, rx2, is
malicious and reports the forged CSI, f2 = [f21, f22], instead of the
genuine CSI, h2 = [h21, h22]. In this case, the channel matrix per-
ceived at transmitters will be F =
instead of H. Using
ZF-BF, the received symbol will become:

h12
f22

f21

(cid:19)

(cid:18)h11
(cid:19)−1(cid:18)√
(cid:33)(cid:18)√

h12
f22
0

(cid:18)y1

(cid:19)

y2

(cid:18)h11
(cid:32)

h21

=

=

(cid:19)(cid:18)h11

f21

h12
h22
1

h21f22−h22f21
h11f22−f21h12

h11h22−h12h21
h11f22−f21h12

(cid:19)

+

(cid:19)

p1m1√
p2m2
p1m1√
p2m2

(cid:18)n1
(cid:19)
(cid:18)n1

n2

+

n2

(cid:19) (6)

The ﬁrst insight in this equation is that no matter how rx2 forges
√
and reports the CSI, rx1 always receives the signal y1 =
p1m1 +
n1. That is, it is impossible for rx2 to inject any payload into y1 by
forging CSI, i.e., misleading the decoded signals at rx1. However,
comparing Eqs. (4) and (6), one can easily see the received signals
at rx2 change when CSI is forged, making it possible to mount the
proposed two types of attack. For example, the information of m1 is
leaked to rx2 with the magnitude of h21f22−h22f21
because the CSI is
h11f22−f21h12
falsely reported as f2, instead of h2. The result of reporting forged
CSI can also be visualized as in Fig. 3(b), where the AP falsely
precodes the direction of message m1 to the direction that is not
orthogonal to h2. We will introduce how the attackers forge well-
designed CSI and report it to the AP for malicious purposes in the
following sections.

rx1 rx2 AP h1 h2 c1m1 h1 h2 Noise f2 m1 h3 m1 m2 c2m2 h1 h2 Noise h3 c2m2 h1 h2 Noise f2 h3 c2m2 c2m2 c1m1 c1m1 h1 h2 Noise f2 m1 h3 m1 m2 c2m2 h1 h2 Noise h3 c2m2 h1 h2 Noise f2 h3 c2m2 c2m2 c1m1 c1m1 777Figure 4—Flow of the snifﬁng attack. rx2 receives the leaked
information of m1 by misleading the precoding process at the AP
with forged CSI. The interference caused by m2 is further removed
because m2 is known to rx2 by connecting to a server hosted by
himself.

3. SNIFFING ATTACK

We now introduce the snifﬁng attack against physical security by
reporting forged CSI. Different from the traditional eavesdropping
where sniffers passively wait for a chance to see and collect vic-
tims’ data, in the snifﬁng attack, eavesdroppers will actively forge
and report CSI. We ﬁrst introduce a way for eavesdroppers to de-
code others’ packets in MU-MIMO networks with physical security
enabled and then propose a heuristic algorithm that efﬁciently real-
izes this attack.

3.1 Decoding the Sniffed Packets

As shown in Eq. (6), when the forged CSI is reported, the re-
ceived signal at the eavesdropper, y2, contains a mixture of signals
from m1 and m2, but both of them are not decodable at rx2 because
of their mutual interference. However, the purpose of the eaves-
dropper rx2 is snifﬁng m1 rather than receiving its own message m2,
and hence it is reasonable to assume m2 is already known to rx2
without loss of generality. When m2 is known to the eavesdrop-
per, rx2 can decode m1 via interference cancellation [15]. That is,
rx2 ﬁrst removes the interference caused by m2 from y2, and then
decodes m1 from the remaining signals as:

mrx2
1 =

√

(h11f22 − f21h12)
p1(h21f22 − h22f21)

(y2 − h11h22 − h12h21
h11f22 − f21h12

= m1 +

√

(h11f22 − f21h12)
p1(h21f22 − h22f21)

n2

√

p2m2)

(7)

where all components, except m1, in this equation are known to rx2,
and the sniffed SNR is controlled by the forged CSI, i.e., f21 and f22.
One way for rx2 to know m2 for signal cancellation is to download
the same message from a server maintained by themselves as shown
in Fig. 4. We have validated this trick on several machines by socket
programs connected through the AP.

3.2 Selection of Forged CSI

√

As shown in Eq. (7), an intuitive selection of forged CSI for the
eavesdropper is (f21, f22) that maximizes the sniffed SNR, i.e., min-
h11f22−f21h12
p1(h21f22−h22f21) . However, this intuition is valid only if the
imizing
interference from m2 can be completely removed and there is no in-
terference caused by artiﬁcial noise. In the process of removing m2,
higher
incurs a higher residual interference due to
imperfect signal cancellation. Moreover, if the null space of the
forged CSI is not the same as h1 and h2, the received signal will be
interfered with by the artiﬁcial noise as shown in Fig. 3. Based on
these two observations, we propose an efﬁcient heuristic to select

p2(h11h22−h12h21)
h11f22−f21h12

√

Figure 5—Example of signal cancellation of sniffed signal.
Sniffed signal at rx2 is ﬁrst corrected by pilots, then the interference
caused by messages sent to rx2 is removed via signal cancellation.

the forged CSI. That is, the forged CSI is selected as a weighted
sum of genuine CSI as:

[f12, f22] = [wh11 − h12, wh21 − h22],

(8)

where w is a adjustable coefﬁcient. Selecting forged CSI with this
heuristic ensures the precoded message is not nulliﬁed by ZF-BF at
rx2 and the strength of leaked information at rx2 is bounded. Ap-
plying this heuristic selection of CSI to Eq. (6), we can derive the
received signal at the eavesdropper as:
√
p2m2 + n2.

√
y2 = w

p1m1 +

(9)

√
p.

In this scenario, the AP is assumed to set power coefﬁcients
equally as p1 = p2 = p and ensure the sent signals to meet the
power constraint, i.e., p((cid:107)h1(cid:107)2 + (cid:107)f2(cid:107)2)/det(F)2 ≤ P. As shown
in this equation, if m2 can be removed completely, then the sniffed
SNR of message m1 at rx2 is proportional to w
The main idea of this selection of forged CSI is that the null space
of wh1 − h2 is the same as that of h1 and h2, so the artiﬁcial noise
sent in the null space still causes no interference to the received
signals at rx2. As shown in Fig. 4, rx2 receives no interference
from the artiﬁcial noise and can thus decode m1 after removing the
known message m2. The effectiveness of this heuristic selection of
forged CSI will be evaluated in Section 5. One thing to note in the
implementation of this attack is that eavesdroppers should keep the
reported CSI on pilot subcarriers intact because signals sent through
those subcarriers are used to remove the central frequency offset
(CFO) caused by imperfect clock synchronization between trans-
mitters and receivers.

Fig. 5 illustrates an example of decoding the sniffed message at
rx2. As shown in the ﬁgure, the unprocessed signal at rx2 seems
unrelated to the target message m1 due to the mixture of m1 and
m2 plus lack of clock synchronization between transmitters and re-
ceivers. However, after correcting CFO and gain via intact pilot
subcarriers and removing the component of m2, the residual signal
is found highly correlated to the target message m1.

MU-MIMO transmission y1 y2 y2 - m2 y3  AP noise m1 m2 m2 m2 (Sniffed signal) (Sent signals) rx3 rx1 rx2 Server hosted by rx2 (cid:239)(cid:21)0(cid:21)(cid:239)(cid:21)0(cid:21)(cid:239)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:239)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:239)(cid:24)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:239)(cid:21)0(cid:21) sent signal (m(cid:20))recevied signalpilotSubcarrier indexReal channel componentCFO & gain corrected by pilotsKnown signal (m2) removed by signal cancellation7784. POWER ATTACK

(cid:80)N

Here we introduce another potential threat, called power attack,
by exploiting forged CSI. As mentioned in Section 2, the total
amount of power for an AP to transmit data via its antennas is
ﬁxed. Under this constraint, several power-allocation mechanisms
have been proposed with different objectives. Of these, two most
representative mechanisms are: (1) equal power (EP) allocation
(i.e., p1 = p2 = . . . = pN) that maximizes fairness among con-
current receivers, and (2) maximizing throughput (MT) allocation
i log(1 + pi/σi)) that maximizes the aggregated
(i.e., argmaxpi
capacity of concurrent receivers. Note that both mechanisms rely
on CSI feedback from receivers. Malicious clients can thus un-
fairly boost their received SINR by misleading the precoding pro-
cess with forged CSI. How to gain favorable SINR with forged CSI
varies with the underlying power-allocation mechanism, which is
actually implementation-speciﬁc in WiFi chips. Thus, without loss
of generality, we will illustrate the concept of power attack against
EP and MT allocations, which are most commonly adopted in MU-
MIMO [4]. This attack can be extended to other power-allocation
mechanisms as long as they rely on CSI feedback.

4.1 Decoded SINR at Malicious Clients

Suppose rx2 is the malicious client, then according to Eq. (6),
the decoded SINR of messages sent to rx2 when forged CSI f2 is
reported becomes:

SINRm2 = log(

p1| h11h22−h12h21
h11f22−f21h12
p2| h21f22−h22f21
h11f22−f21h12

|2 + σ2

2

|2

)

(10)

where p1| h11h22−h12h21
|2 represents the received power of message
h11f22−f21h12
|2 is the power of interference from m1. Note
m2 and p2| h21f22−h22f21
h11f22−f21h12
that the denominator of received power, i.e., |h11f22 − f21h12|2, is
controlled by the forged CSI, f21 and f22. However, decreasing this
dominator also increases the interference from m1 because it has
the same dominator. The optimal selection of forged CSI is to max-
imize SINR(m2) subject to the power constraint P, and this opti-
mization problem is akin to that of ﬁnding the optimal regulariza-
tion term in perturbed channel inversion [31]. Our simulation result
of increased SINR in EP allocation due to the forged CSI is plotted
in Fig. 6, where the forged CSI (i.e., f21 and f22) is selected as real
numbers for easy visualization, and the original CSI at rx2 is la-
beled with a cross in this ﬁgure. After several simulation runs with
different parameter settings, we ﬁnd the optimal selection of forged
CSI lying in a similar direction as the original CSI, which is the di-
rection causing no interference from concurrent transmitters. One
possible explanation of this phenomena against the conclusion in
[31] that perturbated precoding is optimal in terms of SINR is that
the degrees of freedom in our optimization problem are not full.
That is, unlike the optimization problem of perturbated precoding
matrix which can modify any components in the precoding matrix,
our optimization problem can only control the second row of pre-
coding matrix, i.e., f21 and f22. Thus, based on this observation,
instead of solving the optimization problem in real time, we pro-
pose an efﬁcient heuristic to select proper CSI to gain a favorable
power allocation to message m2 for both EP and MT allocations.

4.2 Selection of Forged CSI in EP

To exploit the vulnerability of the AP’s power allocation based
on CSI feedback, one simple and effective heuristic is to report a
scaled version of CSI which has the same direction as the genuine
CSI. This idea is identical to ZF-BF which nulliﬁes the interference
caused by concurrent transmissions even though it has been proven

Figure 6—Effectiveness of forged CSI selection. The increased
SINR (dB), i.e., SINR with forged CSI subtracted by SINR with
the genuine CSI, is shown in gray scale, where the white color rep-
resents a 12dB increase and the black color represents a 27dB de-
crease.

in [31] not optimal in terms of received SINR. Using this approach,
the forged CSI is selected as:

[f21, f22] = w[h21, h22],

(11)
where w is a constant within [0, 1] in EP allocation to pretend rx2
suffering from heavy channel fading and w is set larger than 1 in
MT allocation to pretend having high quality of rx2’s channel.

Applying this forged CSI to Eq. (6), the received signal is sim-

pliﬁed as:

√
p2
w
h11h22−h12h21

y2 =

m2 + n2,

(12)

√
p2
w =

√

where
allocation, because p1 = p2 = det(F)2P/((cid:107)h1(cid:107)2 + (cid:107)f2(cid:107)2).

w2(|h21|2+|h22|2)+|h11|2+|h12|2 in the equal power (EP)

This equation indicates the optimal selection of w to be 0. How-
ever, this selection is not feasible because the AP might refuse to
send data toward clients who claim their channel gain is 0. More-
over, higher received SINR of packets doesn’t imply higher through-
put because the throughput is related to the modulation and rate se-
lection which are both controlled by transmitters. Rate adaption in
MU-MIMO still remains to be an open question. Existing proto-
cols either select modulation based on history or suggestions from
receivers. In both of these schemes, forging CSI with different w
makes no difference because the two rate adaptations do not rely on
the magnitude of reported CSI. However, there exists ongoing re-
search on the estimation of SINR based on rate adaptation with re-
ported CSI [35, 16]. In these schemes, a small w will incur a lower
rate assigned to transmit m2 because the AP perceives the chan-
nel gain toward rx2 to be small, i.e., w < 1. For example, forged
CSI with w = 0.3 might increase the received SINR of m2 from
10dB to 15dB, but it might decrease the assigned data rate from
11Mbps to 5.5Mbps, which eventually decreases nearly to a half of
the throughput of malicious users. If these protocols are adopted in
future MU-MIMO networks, one possible way to realize power at-
tack is also to forge the reported noise estimation, because most of
those protocols rely on reported noise estimation to calculate SINR
at receivers. For example, when CSI is reported as wh2, rx2 can
also report its noise variance as wσ2 to mislead the rate-adaptation
protocol in the AP. The way to cheat on noise feedback for differ-
ent rate-adaptation protocols is part of our future work, and in the
following sections, the channel capacity deﬁned as log(1 + SINR)
will be used to estimate the effectiveness of the proposed power

 Forged CSI of 1st antenna (f21)Forged CSI of 2nd antenna (f22)  −5−2.502.55−5−2.502.55Increased SINR (db)−25−20−15−10−50510779Figure 8—SNR of sniffed message m1.

(a) WARP testbed

(b) Testing locations

Figure 7—Testing environment. Experiments are conducted in an
area representing a typical environment of WiFi transmission full of
multi-paths. The red circles represent the position of WARP boards
and the grey blocks represent the pillars, tables, racks, and other
obstacles.

attack without loss of generality because it represents a theoretical
upper-bound of transmission throughput in the real world.

4.3 Forged CSI Selection in MT

Figure 9—BER of sniffed message m1.

(cid:80)N

Analysis of forged CSI selection at MT allocation is more com-
plex since the power allocation becomes a nonlinear optimization
problem to maximize total capacity, i.e., capacity(p1, . . . , pN) =

i=1 log(1 + pi/σni ), subject to the total power constraint.
This problem can be solved by a well-known waterﬁlling algo-

rithm [46]:

pi = (

u

(cid:107)ci(cid:107)2 − σni )+

sen to satisfy the total power constraint, i.e., (cid:80)2

where (x)+ denotes max(x, 0) and u represents the water level cho-
i=1 (cid:107)ci(cid:107)2pi ≤ P.
Applying our heuristic f2 = wh2 to this equation, the power coefﬁ-
cient allocated to m2 becomes:

(13)

p2 = (w2 P(cid:107)det(H)(cid:107)2 + σ1(cid:107)h2(cid:107)2

2(cid:107)h1(cid:107)2

− σ2

2 )+.

(14)

Based on this derivation, in MT allocation, selection of w > 1
is desirable to gain favorable power allocation, especially when the
ﬁrst term, P(cid:107)det(H)(cid:107)2+σ1(cid:107)h2(cid:107)2
2 . With a
large enough w, it is even possible to gain power from that allocated
to message m2, while the power originally allocated to m2 is 0. The
effectiveness of this CSI selection will be discussed in Section 5.

, is close to the second term σ2

2(cid:107)h1(cid:107)2

5. EVALUATION

We now evaluate the effect of the proposed attacks based on
forged CSI while focusing on the sniffed SNR and the capacity in-
crease with forged CSI. We implemented the proposed attacks on
a testbed built with WARP boards [20], each of which is equipped
with two antennas as shown in Fig. 7(a). In the case of physical
security, an additional WARP board is connected to the transmitter
with CM-MMCX modules to transmit artiﬁcial noises. An 802.11-
like MU-MIMO is implemented in this testbed where the long train-
ing sequences following the 802.11n/ac standard are used to esti-
mate the CSI. 30-symbol payloads are transmitted in a 2.4GHz band
with 64 subcarriers. Only 52 of these 64 subcarriers are used to
transmit data and 4 of them are used as pilots to correct the central
frequency offset (CFO). There are three single-antenna receivers,
two of which are intended users, rx1 and rx2, while the remaining

receiver, rx3, is the sniffer not in the concurrent transmission with
others. The receiver rx2 is designed to be the malicious user who
reports forged CSI in concurrent transmission. We placed the nodes
in the marked locations in Fig. 7(b) and each result at a single loca-
tion is an average of 5 experimental runs. During the experiment,
the locations of the transmitter and receivers are interchangeable, so
there are more than 300 transmissions for each forged CSI setting.
In each transmission, a single user transmission without beamform-
ing is used ﬁrst to estimate the channel gain for each receiver. The
trace including received SNR lower than 5dB is discarded because
it is not in the operational range of WiFi. The received SNR distri-
bution in our experiments ranges between 5dB and 28dB which is
representative of current wireless systems.

5.1 Snifﬁng Attack

Figs. 8 and 9 show the decoded SNR and bit-error-rate (BER) of
message m1 received by different users rx1, rx2 and rx3. Both rx2
and rx3 want to sniff rx1’s message. In this experiment, 1/4 of the
AP’s power is used to send artiﬁcial noise, and signals are modu-
lated with BPSK for easy comparison. We ﬁrst investigate the per-
formance of physical security with artiﬁcial noise and ZF-BF. Due
to the artiﬁcial noise, the sniffer (rx3) not in concurrent transmission
experiences about 9dB SNR degradation in decoding m1, compared
to the decoded SNR at rx1. On the other hand, the receiverrx2 in the
concurrent transmission receives almost nothing because the sent
signal of c1m1 is nulliﬁed in the direction of h2. This result is con-
sistent with the proof in [3, 12]. One thing to note, though, is that
rx3 still has 4% probability to decode m1 with less than 0.2 BER
because the sent artiﬁcial noise is not strong enough to change the
received signal in some traces where the direction of h3 is near the
plane spanned by h1 and h2. This problem can be addressed further
with higher modulation schemes like QPSK/16-QAM or by send-
ing stronger artiﬁcial noise. The enhancement of secrecy by using
stronger noise power is plotted in Fig. 11, where BER of sniffed
data at rx3 is increased to 0.45 when 65% of the AP’s power is
used to transmit artiﬁcial noise, but this also increases the BER of
received data at rx1 due to the decease of power used to transmit

44' −50510152000.20.40.60.81SNR sniffed (db)CDF distribution  rx1rx2rx3forged CSI00.10.20.30.40.50.60.700.20.40.60.81BER sniffedCDF distribution  rx1rx2rx3forged CSI780(a) Image at rx1

(b) Image at rx2 w/o cheating

(c) Image at rx3

(d) Image at rx2 w/ cheating

Figure 10—A bitmap image is transmitted to rx1. The information is leaked to rx2 when CSI is forged even when physical security is
enabled.

Figure 11—BER of sniffed message m1 at different noise levels.

Figure 12—SNR of sniffed message m1 with different w.

m1. How to select a proper modulation or magnitude of artiﬁcial
noise is beyond the scope of this paper since we will demonstrate
an easier way for rx2 to sniff message m1 with the same decoding
capability as the intended receiver rx1 regardless of the strength of
artiﬁcial noise.

As discussed previously, if the genuine CSI is reported, rx2 will
always receive nothing about message m1, making the decoded
BER of rx2 close to the theoretical bound of 0.5. However, as shown
in Figs. 8 and 9, when the CSI is forged to be wh1 − h2 with pa-
rameter w = 1, the sniffed SNR and BER of m1 at rx2 are almost
the same as decoded at rx1. This implies that rx2 can always sniff
packets sent to rx1 if it is decodable at rx1 even when physical secu-
rity is enabled. An illustrative example of sending and snifﬁng the
transmission of a grayscale bitmap image via WARPs is provided
in Fig. 10, demonstrating the effectiveness of physical security in
thwarting eavesdroppers and how the forged CSI undermines the
effectiveness of physical security.

√
These results are also consistent with the derivation of Eq. 9 in
pm1 as at rx1 if w is
that rx2 receives the same magnitude of
set to 1, but the decoded SNR at rx2 is slightly lower than that at
rx1 because of imperfect cancellation of the interference caused by
√
pm2. The larger the w, the larger the magnitude of sniffed mes-
sage m1. The average decoded SNR of m1 with different w is plotted
in Fig. 12. One takeaway from this ﬁgure is that selecting a large w
helps decode the sniffed message, but this trend is not prominent af-
ter w gets larger than 2 because reporting a larger w incurs less total
power to be used for transmitting data to rx2 as shown in the power
attack. Moreover, reporting a forged CSI as wh1 − h2 with a large
w is unwise because the AP might not place rx2 in the same con-
current transmission group with rx1 if the reported CSI indicates a
direction that degrades the performance of MU-MIMO. For exam-
ple, reporting a forged CSI with w = 5 decreases the decoded SNR
of m1 at rx1 from 11dB to 4dB, and hence it is unlikely for the AP to

place those two clients in the same concurrent transmission group.
These observations led to the selection of w = 1.5 for the purpose
of eavesdropping, which ensures rx2 to have 3dB higher capability
in decoding m1 than rx1 with less effect on the received SNR at rx1.
However, the optimal selection of w also depends on other condi-
tions, such as the users scheduling algorithm adopted by the AP
and the channel condition of eavesdroppers, which are beyond the
scope of this paper. One thing worth noting in this snifﬁng attack
is that malicious clients should be equipped with at least the same
number of antennas as other concurrent receivers to sniff packets. It
is straightforward to extend this attack to the system with multiple
antennas.

5.2 Power Attack

To measure the performance of the proposed power attack, a met-
ric called capacity increase ratio is used to estimate the resources
unfairly gained with forged CSI, which is deﬁned as the ratio of
capacity increase with forged CSI to the capacity without forged
CSI.

Based on the observation in Section 4, we let rx2 report forged
CSI as wh2 with w = 0.3 and w = 4.0 in EP and MT, respec-
tively. The overall performance of these settings is summarized in
Figs. 13 and 14. First, we ﬁnd that in the EP power allocation, re-
porting forged CSI instead of genuine CSI can, on average, gain
an unfair 20% additional capacity. This unfair power allocation
also causes rx1 a 40% decrease of capacity. The capacity increase
with forged CSI actually depends on the channel conditions of con-
current clients, rx1 and rx2. To study this, we group the metric
by different SNR gaps which are deﬁned as the original SNR of
rx2 minus the original SNR of rx1 if MU-MIMO is disabled. As
shown in Fig. 15, if the SNR gap between rx1 and rx2 is between
−5 ∼ −10dB, i.e., the channel condition of rx1 is far better than
that of rx2, pretending to have a “weaker" channel in the EP scheme

0.250.30.350.40.450.50.550.60.6500.10.20.30.40.5Noise power ratioBER sniffed  rx1rx2rx3forged CSI012345051015wSNR sniffed (db)  rx1rx2 w/ forged CSI781Figure 13—Capacity increase distribution in EP.

Figure 15—Capacity increase at rx2 with forged CSI.

Figure 14—Capacity increase distribution in MT.

Figure 16—Proposed CSIsec feedback scheme.

doesn’t help much because the AP is already spending more power
for rx2. In contrast, if the SNR gap ranges from 5 to 10dB, implying
that the channel condition of rx2 is much better and the AP inten-
tionally reserves more power for rx1. In this situation, pretending a
weak channel with w < 1 helps rx2 regain the shared power alloca-
tion, resulting in an unfairly high capacity increase ratio as shown
in Fig. 15.

An interesting observation from our experiments is that the be-
havior of reporting forged CSI in MT is totally different from that
in EP. As shown in Fig. 14, the overall performance of reporting
forged CSI in MT is less effective for malicious clients than in EP.
On average, only 13% additional capacity is gained with forged CSI
in MT. Moreover, the distribution of capacity increase ratio is very
skewed. 80% of transmissions increase capacity only by less than
6% by reporting forged CSI. This low effectiveness mainly comes
from the forged parameter w > 1. When w is set larger than 1,
the precoding process of ZF-BF will inherently impose a weight
1
w on the message sent to rx2 as shown in Eq. (12). Even in MT
where the AP is misled to make a higher power allocation p2 to
rx2 as shown in Eq. (14), the loss in the precoding matrix offsets
the power unfairly acquired from the AP. We should also note that
with 10% probability, rx2 can gain more than 50% additional ca-
pacity. In such cases, rx2 is actually located in the SNR region that
the AP will remove power allocated to rx2 due to its bad channel
condition, compared to rx1. In this situation, “balloning" CSI with
w > 1 helps mislead the AP to share its power allocation with the
malicious clients, boosting their received capacity. Based on this
idea, we ﬁnd that if the original SNR of rx2 is 10 to 15dB less than
rx1, reporting forged CSI has potential for a large capacity boost as
shown in Fig. 15, which is opposite to the EP power allocation.

Reporting forged CSI for the selﬁsh purpose in MT is also less at-
tractive than in EP. Note that the capacity increases in both schemes
come at the expense of performance loss of rx1. Moreover, in both
schemes, reporting forged CSI with proper selection of w incurs no
penalty for receivers, and hence malicious clients have incentives
to cheat on CSI in both schemes.

6. COUNTERMEASURES

We categorize the proposed forged CSI attacks (1) based on the
genuine CSI and (2) not based on the genuine CSI. For example, the
snifﬁng attack belongs to the ﬁrst category while the power attack
belongs to the second category.

One necessary assumption for the attacks in the ﬁrst category is
that malicious clients should know their own and other clients’ CSI.
This assumption is valid in existing MU-MIMO systems since CSI
is estimated by receivers using a known sequence, K, in downlink
transmission and fed back by receivers to the APs [38]. One obvi-
ous way to prevent CSI leakage during the feedback process is to
introduce cryptosystems into the feedback process. For example, if
the estimated CSI at a client is encrypted by the AP’s public key be-
fore sending it to the AP, other concurrent clients cannot decode the
CSI and forge CSI based on that information. However, this method
requires the modiﬁcation of CSI feedback protocol in both clients
and the AP. Moreover, encrypting the feedback CSI incurs addi-
tional overheads of key exchange and encryption/decryption, which
have been shown to be avoidable by using physical security. Thus,
to prevent receivers from reporting forged CSI with limited over-
head, we propose a novel CSI feedback system, called CSIsec
protocol, as shown in Fig. 16.

In the CSIsec protocol, transmitters are assumed benign and
transmit an unknown sequence U – instead of the original known
sequence K – for clients to estimate CSI. U is a random unknown
sequence that varies whenever transmitters calls for the CSI esti-
mation process (i.e., by changing the HT-LTF ﬁeld), and only the
transmitters know the secret value of U. This way, the estimated
CSI at a receiver is ˆh = (Uh + n)/K, which is no longer an un-
biased estimation of CSI, h, because the estimation process at re-
ceivers is misled by the unknown sequence U. After the transmitter
receives the feedback from the receiver, i.e., ˆh, CSI is re-estimated
by ˇh = Kˆh/U = h + n/U, and this re-estimated CSI is used to
calculate the precoding matrix. All the necessary modiﬁcations of
CSIsec protocol is at the transmitter side, and there is no need to
modify the receiver side of existing protocols.

−80−60−40−2002040608000.20.40.60.81Capacity increased ratio (%)CDF distribution  rx1rx2−100−5005010015020025000.20.40.60.81Capacity increased ratio (%)CDF distribution  rx1rx2−10~−5−5~00~55~10010203040SNR gap range (db)Capacity increased ratio (%)  MTEPChallenge(and(feedback((cont.)(Transmi8er(AP)(Receivers/A8ackers(Unknown(sequence(U"Precoded(Packets(+(arEﬁcial(noise(Received:(y"="hU"EsEmate:(h"="y/K"h"="hK/U(Beamforming(based(on(h"Feedback(h"^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 7826.1 Secure Analysis of CSIsec Protocol

To prove the security guarantee by CSIsec, the following ques-

tions are answered sequentially:
• Can the snifﬁng attack work under the protection of CSIsec?
• Can the unknown sequence be recovered by attackers?
• Can CSI be leaked via other side channels?

Figure 17—Packet structure in 802.11n/ac.

To mount the snifﬁng attack with forged CSI as introduced in
Section 3, the attacker must report the forged CSI that is orthogonal
to the same null space of the original CSI. Otherwise, the sniffed
data is not decodable due to the sent artiﬁcial noise as shown in
Section 5. For example, suppose rx2 wants to sniff the packets sent
to rx1, then rx2 should ﬁrst sniff the CSI h1 of rx1 when rx1 feeds
back the CSI to the AP. However, in the CSIsec protocol, the
sniffed CSI rx1 feeds back is actually ˆh1 = U1
K h1 + n instead of
h1, and even the estimated h2 at rx2 is ˆh2 = U2
K h2 instead of h2.
Recall that the way malicious clients can fool transmitters and sniff
the messages to rx1 is to make transmitters believe the CSI at rx2
ˆh2 = wh1 − h2 that has the same null space as the
is ˇh2 = K
U2
genuine CSI. This implies the feedback from rx2 should be ˆh2 =
K (wh1 − h2) = wU2
U2
K h2, which can only be estimated when
U2 and U1 are known to the attackers. Thus, CSIsec protocol
prevents malicious clients from reporting forged CSI based on the
genuine CSI of concurrent receivers. Our evaluation shows that
failure to estimate CSI correctly incurs a 9dB drop of sniffed SNR
which is considered secure in case of physical security [3].

ˆh1 − U2

The above analysis is valid under the assumption that U1 and U2
are secret known to transmitters only. This is a reasonable assump-
tion because the received data at clients/attackers are y = hU + n,
where n is and additive Gaussian noise. When the CSI of clients is
assumed independent of each other and drawn from a Gaussian dis-
tribution, it is easy to ﬁnd that the distribution of received/sniffed
data at clients, i.e., y, is also a Gaussian distribution, which is con-
sidered impossible to be decomposed if h, U and n are all unknown
to clients. Thus, even when there are multiple attackers collude
with each other, none of them can recover U from the CSI estima-
tion process, ensuring the security guaranteed by CSIsec. Sup-
pose attackers can exhaustively search the space of all possible val-
ues of U and know the answer once the right sequence is tried. In
existing 802.11n/ac systems with 52 subcarriers, an unknown se-
quence, U, modulated with QPSK, i.e., U = {±1,±i}52, requires
2208 operations for malicious clients to ﬁnd the CSI using a brute-
force search, and this whole process must be completed before the
timeout of feedback process.

U1

Let us consider the possibility of existence of a side channel (out-
side the CSI estimation process) that malicious clients can use to
estimate CSI. For example, CSI, denoted by h, can be estimated
through other ﬁelds if the sent signal is known, i.e., h = y/x : x ∈
other ﬁelds. As the structure deﬁned in Fig. 17, 802.11n/ac pack-
ets can be divided into data and preamble ﬁelds. In MU-MIMO
with physical security, the data ﬁeld is precoded by ZF-BF and
transmitted with artiﬁcial noise as discussed in Section 2, so it
does not leak CSI to eavesdroppers. In contrast, preambles such
as L-STF, L-LTF, L-SIG, and HT-SIG are transmitted without
precoding for backward compatibility, thus enabling all receivers
to sense these control ﬁelds. In the preamble ﬁelds, HT-LTF1 to
HT-LTFN represents the known sequence sent via each individ-
ual antenna for receivers to estimate their CSI. These ﬁelds do not
leak CSI either, because CSIsec sends an unknown sequence U
in those ﬁelds instead of the original known sequence K. Thus,
the only remaining ﬁelds that might leak CSI to eavesdroppers are

Figure 18—Estimated CSI with different methods.

L-STF, L-LTF, L-SIG, and HT-SIG. However, even if these
ﬁelds are modulated without spatial precoding, malicious clients
cannot estimate CSI through those non-beamformed ﬁelds because
APs in 802.11n/ac use all antennas with cyclic shifts to send those
ﬁelds. Thus, the estimated CSI through those ﬁelds at receiver rxi
is γ1hi2 + γ2hi2 + . . . + γNhiN, not CSI for each antenna, where
γj represents the predeﬁned cyclic shift. When CSI is assumed to
be an independent Gaussian distribution, the received data in those
ﬁelds also follow the Gaussian distribution, so it too is unlikely to
decompose CSI components, hi1, hi2,. . . , hiN by those ﬁelds.

An example of estimated CSI by different methods is shown in
Fig. 18, where estimated CSI via HT-LTF at clients, ˆh, is diver-
gent from the original CSI, h, due to the unknown sequence U.
Moreover, the CSI estimated via L-LTF, i.e., the ﬁelds transmitted
without spatial coding, is also different from the original CSI be-
cause of cyclic preﬁx. On the other hand, The AP is shown to be
able to recover the original CSI with the misguided feedback from
clients. In our experiments, the transmission precoded with CSI es-
timated by an unknown sequence U incurs only an average of 1dB
SNR loss due to its non-optimality of peak-to-average-power-ratio
(PAPR).

We have shown above that malicious clients can only attack the
precoding process based on the genuine CSI and knowledge of U.
In reality, it is impossible to attack the precoding since CSI and U
are both unknown to the attackers. We also (i) showed the leakage
of CSI under CSIsec is minimal and (ii) provided experimental
evaluation results. In conclusion, CSIsec can prevent clients from
getting an accurate estimate of CSI and also thwart any forged CSI
attack based on the genuine estimation of CSI.

6.2 Disincentivized Power Allocation

In CSIsec, even though malicious clients are unable to know
their own CSI, the second category of forging CSI attacks without
knowing the CSI, such as the proposed power attack is still pos-
sible. For example, instead of reporting ˆh = U
K h back to the AP,
a malicious client can choose to report wˆh even though he doesn’t
know the real h. This feedback has the same effect as power attack

L-STF L-LTF L-SIG HT- SIG HT- LTF1 HT- LTFN HT Data HT- STF Legacy Preamble HT Preamble Transmitted w/o precoding but w/ cyclic shift Transmitted  w/ precoding Transmitted by each antenna −20−1001020−1.5−1−0.500.511.5Real channelSubcarrier index  hˆhˇhEstimatedvianon-precodedﬁelds783caused by imperfect CSI [11, 28, 39]. However, none of these have
considered the vulnerability of CSI feedback. We are the ﬁrst to
consider intentional forging and reporting of CSI to attack the pre-
coding process for malicious purposes.

7.2 Physical Security

Physical security has been widely studied in wireless systems
[27]. For example, the authors of [9] proved that, with an enough
number of antennas, conﬁdential messages protected with physical
security are harder to break by brute-force approaches than tradi-
tional cryptosystems, and the authors of [22, 24] derived a theoret-
ical bound of secret capacity of transmitting conﬁdential messages
in MU-MIMO. Physical security can be utilized in different forms
in real-world systems. For example, proper artiﬁcial noise can be
added without affecting intended receivers while keeping transmit-
ted messages conﬁdential [13]. In STROBE [3], this idea was ex-
perimentally validated and proved that the received SNR at sniffers
is 15dB lower than the legitimate receivers. In MU-MIMO, ZF-BF
was used to keep data conﬁdential to concurrent receivers [12]. On
the other hand, uplink authentication based on physical security was
also proposed to differentiate attackers from legitimate transmitters
through signatures like uplink CSI [30, 44]. A detailed survey of
how physical security can be applied in multi-user wireless envi-
ronments can be found in [27, 37]. However, all of these assume
the reported CSI is genuine, but we prove that forged CSI can eas-
ily undermine the effectiveness of wireless network mechanisms. A
recent effort [34] also shows the vulnerability of physical security
based on artiﬁcial noise. There the precoding matrix with artiﬁcial
noise is estimated by an adaptive ﬁlter under the assumption that
the sent message is known to attackers. Multiple attackers and CSI
of channels to them are necessary to realize their attack. The main
difference between this and ours is that we don’t need the known-
plaintext assumption, making our proposed attacks more practical
and general. Moreover, our attacks actively control the precoding
matrix at transmitters with forged CSI, providing high efﬁciency in
decoding sniffed data. For example, in our snifﬁng attack, a single
malicious client can decode the same level of SNR as legitimate re-
ceivers with only one antenna. Note that the proposed CSIsec is
also capable of mitigating the eavesdroppers shown in [34] because
CSI estimation at eavesdroppers is necessary for preﬁltering.

7.3 Attack Patterns Against CSI

Attacks against CSI feedback have been studied extensively. For
example, the authors of [26] selectively jammed the CSI feedback
to subvert MIMO network’s performance, and a corresponding coun-
termeasure to mitigate this problem was proposed in [29]. How-
ever, this paper is the ﬁrst that discusses the vulnerability of the
precoding process by reporting forged CSI. There also exists work
[14, 23, 32] that uses falsiﬁed metrics to break systems, but none
of them addresses the same questions as in this paper. For exam-
ple, the scheme in [14] falsely replies a page message for DDoS
attack in GSM, and [32] dishonestly increases the reported CQI to
gains more transmission opportunity in LTE. Our work differs from
them in that it exploits the precoding process in MU-MIMO. The
closest to ours is the mimicry attack [23], in which attackers spoof
uplink signals properly based on uplink CSI of legitimate trans-
mitters against CSI-based authentication [30, 44]. In the mimicry
attack, the uplink CSI is unknown to attackers, which will incur
additional complexity to learn the uplink CSI by using methods
like those in [17, 40], making this attack less practical. Instead of
mimicry targeting the uplink, we focus on downlink security which
is more vulnerable because downlink CSI must be fed back from re-
ceivers (attackers). Instead of estimating CSI explicitly, there exist

Figure 19—Capacity increase in randomized settings.

presented in Section 4 to mislead transmitters that the attacker’s
CSI is ˇh = K
U

ˆh = wh, instead of h.

It is easy to see that there is no way to prevent or even de-
tect this behavior via feedback from clients when only the scale
of forged CSI is modiﬁed. This problem is analogous to a mali-
cious speedometer that always reports w × speed to drivers instead
of the real speed. It is impossible for the drivers to determine if
the speedometer is lying by querying the malicious speedometer
(cheating clients). The only way to detect a malicious speedome-
ter is to know the ground truth via other side channels, such as the
estimated time driven from home to work. In wireless networks,
there exist side channels of CSI at clients, e.g., spatial dependency
in CSI among clients [17]. However, the existing work that ex-
plores the dependency among clients requires additional devices,
help from (malicious) clients, and other strict assumptions on fad-
ing channels. It is also proven that CSI is quickly de-correlated in
the real world when the distance between clients is greater than a
half of the wavelength [4].

Thus, instead of ﬁnding other side channels to validate the cor-
rectness of reported CSI, future MU-MIMO should incorporate ran-
domness into its protocols to discourage malicious clients from
falsely reporting the scale of their CSI. For example, the AP can
randomly switch between EP and MT power allocations to confuse
malicious clients in choosing the right forged parameters w. In this
way, the expected capacity to be gained by forging the scale of CSI
is smaller than 0 because malicious clients are unable to determine
which forged CSI to report. For example, as shown in Fig. 19, when
the AP has 80% and 20% probabilities to allocate power based on
MT and EP, respectively, malicious clients gain zero or negative
reward regardless how they forge CSI.

7. RELATED WORK

We ﬁrst discuss the related work on CSI estimation in wireless
networks and then present the marriage between MIMO networks
and physical security. Finally, we discuss several state-of-art at-
tacks on CSI feedback.

7.1 CSI in Wireless Communications

CSI is an important metric in wireless systems [1, 2, 5].

Im-
perfect estimation of CSI is known to cause serious problems in
wireless systems [4, 47]. Therefore, many researchers proposed
ways of improving the accuracy of CSI estimation and reducing the
overhead of CSI transmission. In [21], the authors proposed a CSI
estimation scheme based on the idea similar to compressive sensing
and the authors of [43] investigated adaptive CSI feedback which
ensures the accuracy and decreases the feedback overhead. In [19],
the authors studied the tradeoff in channel correlation, user diver-
sity and MU-MIMO efﬁciency, and then proposed an optimal CSI
feedback scheme for downlink MU-MIMO systems by manipulat-
ing the time and frequency intervals in CSI feedback. Meanwhile,
a large amount of effort has been made to overcome the problems

00.511.52−20−1001020wCapacity increased ratio (%)  EPMTRandom784techniques called blind CSI estimation [36, 42], which adaptively
learns CSI based on the subspace structure of channel fading. A
similar procedure is also used to create discriminatory channel es-
timation that eavesdroppers are unable to learn CSI [7, 18]. The
concept of sending unknown sequences in CSIsec is also adopted
in this work, but all of the existing protocols require the modiﬁ-
cation of clients while CSIsec only requires the modiﬁcation of
transmitters.

8. DISCUSSION

Since we target low-level design of wireless systems, the details
of attacks need to be adapted for the different mechanisms under
consideration, but it is still valid for other protocols. For example,
if proportional fairness is adopted for power allocation, i.e., allo-
cating power proportional to the clients’ reported quality of links,
the same technique to forge CSI with a higher magnitude can also
be used by the attacker. On the other hand, if proportional fair-
ness is adopted in the same way as in LTE for user scheduling [32],
monotonically increased CSI can also gain slots unfairly allocated
to that attacker. Actually, there are numerous protocols and variants
of power allocation, link adaptation, and user scheduling in wire-
less systems. To illustrate and validate our proposed model with a
real-world implementation, we present most representative mech-
anisms such as maximizing fairness or maximizing sum-capacity.
The case of proportional fairness actually lies between these ex-
tremes, and different parameter settings can make it either more
aggressive (maximizing sum-capacity) or conservative (maximiz-
ing fairness). Some proportional fairness schemes such as [25] also
choose QoS as an indicator to allocate resource which can also be
compromised because QoS is reported by clients, but how to ma-
nipulate QoS reports to gain an unfair share of resource is beyond
the scope of this paper.

9. CONCLUSION

This paper studies the security of CSI feedback in MU-MIMO
downlink and is the ﬁrst to explore potential threats in the precoding
process by forging CSI. We proposed two possible attacks, snifﬁng
attack and power attack and validated their possibility in real-world
MU-MIMO systems. Note, however, that these two are not the only
possible attacks by forging CSI. We believe that any existing pro-
tocol relying on CSI feedback might be vulnerable to some extent.
For example, the authors of [46] proposed an optimal user schedul-
ing algorithm in ZF-BF that greedily adds clients with the CSI most
orthogonal to other clients into concurrent transmission. In such a
case, malicious clients can exploit the same trick used in snifﬁng
attack to gain more for concurrent transmissions. Likewise, if the
AP chooses a user scheduling algorithm which maximizes the to-
tal throughput, forging CSI as discussed in the power attack can be
adopted to gain in concurrent transmissions.

To mitigate the problem caused by attacks on CSI feedback, we
proposed CSIsec for existing MU-MIMO systems which only
needs modiﬁcation in the AP at minimal cost. Even though the at-
tacks proposed in this paper have not yet been exploited in the wild,
these threats are likely to become real as MU-MIMO like 802.11ac
and physical security become prevalent. It is thus necessary for the
research and industry communities to account for this vulnerability
in the design of next-generation wireless communication systems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank Alex Halderman, Safavi-Naini,
Kassem Fawaz, Yuanchao Shu, Kate Ching-Ju Lin, Wei-Liang Shen,
Yaohui Li, and anonymous reviewers for constructive comments on
the earlier versions of this paper.

The work reported in this paper was supported in part by the NSF
under Grants CNS-0905143 and CNS-1114837, by the AFOSR un-
der Grant FA9550-10-1-0393, and by the ARO under Grant W811NF-
12-1-0530.

10. REFERENCES
[1] Ieee standard: 802.11tm:wireless lan medium access control (mac)

and physical layer (phy) speciﬁcations. 2007.

[2] Wireless lan medium access control (mac) and physical layer (phy)

speciﬁcation, ieee std. 802.11ac draft 2.0. 2012.

[3] N. Anand, S.-J. Lee, and E. Knightly. Strobe: Actively securing

wireless communications using zero-forcing beamforming. In
Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’12, pages 720–728.

[4] E. Aryafar, N. Anand, T. Salonidis, and E. W. Knightly. Design and
experimental evaluation of multi-user beamforming in wireless lans.
In Proceedings of ACM MOBICOM ’10, pages 197–208.

[5] H. V. Balan, R. Rogalin, A. Michaloliakos, K. Psounis, and G. Caire.

Achieving high data rates in a distributed mimo system. In
Proceedings of ACM MOBICOM ’12, pages 41–52.

[6] O. Bejarano, E. Knightly, and M. Park. Ieee 802.11ac: from
channelization to multi-user mimo. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 2013.

[7] T.-H. Chang, W.-C. Chiang, Y. Hong, and C.-Y. Chi. Training

sequence design for discriminatory channel estimation in wireless
mimo systems. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
58(12):6223–6237, Dec 2010.

[8] M. H. M. Costa. Writing on dirty paper. IEEE Transactions on

Information Theory, 29(3):439–441, May 1983.

[9] T. Dean and A. Goldsmith. Physical-layer cryptography through

massive mimo. In IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW) ’13,
pages 1–5.

[10] W. Difﬁe and M. Hellman. New directions in cryptography.

Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 22(6):644–654, 1976.

[11] M. Ding and S. Blostein. Mimo minimum total mse transceiver

design with imperfect csi at both ends. IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, 57(3):1141–1150, March 2009.

[12] G. Geraci, M. Egan, J. Yuan, A. Razi, and I. Collings. Secrecy

sum-rates for multi-user mimo regularized channel inversion
precoding. IEEE Transactions on Communications,
60(11):3472–3482, 2012.

[13] S. Goel and R. Negi. Guaranteeing secrecy using artiﬁcial noise.

IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 7(6):2180–2189,
2008.

[14] N. Golde, K. Redon, and J.-P. Seifert. Let me answer that for you:

Exploiting broadcast information in cellular networks. In
Proceedings of USENIX SEC ’13, pages 33–48.

[15] S. Gollakota, S. D. Perli, and D. Katabi. Interference alignment and

cancellation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM ’09, pages
159–170.

[16] D. Halperin, W. Hu, A. Sheth, and D. Wetherall. Predictable 802.11
packet delivery from wireless channel measurements. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGCOMM’10, pages 159–170.

[17] X. He, H. Dai, W. Shen, and P. Ning. Is link signature dependable for
wireless security? In Proceedings of INFOCOM ’13, pages 200–204.

[18] C.-W. Huang, T.-H. Chang, X. Zhou, and Y.-W. Hong. Two-way
training for discriminatory channel estimation in wireless mimo
systems. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
61(10):2724–2738, May 2013.

[19] N. Jindal and S. Ramprashad. Optimizing csi feedback for mu-mimo:

Tradeoffs in channel correlation, user diversity and mu-mimo
efﬁciency. In Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC Spring) ’11, pages 1–5.

[20] A. Khattab, J. Camp, C. Hunter, P. Murphy, A. Sabharwal, and E. W.
Knightly. Warp: A ﬂexible platform for clean-slate wireless medium

785access protocol design. SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev.,
12:56–58, 2008.

[21] T.-H. Lin and H. Kung. Concurrent channel access and estimation for

scalable multiuser mimo networking. In Proceedings of IEEE
INFOCOM ’13, pages 140–144.

[22] R. Liu, T. Liu, H. Poor, and S. Shamai. Multiple-input

multiple-output gaussian broadcast channels with conﬁdential
messages. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56:4215–4227,
2010.

[23] Y. Liu and P. Ning. Poster: Mimicry attacks against wireless link

signature. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 801–804.

[24] H. Ly, T. Liu, and Y. Liang. Multiple-input multiple-output gaussian
broadcast channels with common and conﬁdential messages. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 56:5477–5487, 2010.

[25] A. Mahmoud, A. Al-Rayyah, and T. Sheltami. Adaptive power

allocation algorithm to support absolute proportional rates constraint
for scalable ofdm systems. In Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference, pages 1–4, 2010.

[26] R. Miller and W. Trappe. Subverting mimo wireless systems by

jamming the channel estimation procedure. In Proceedings of ACM
WiSec ’10, pages 19–24.

[27] A. Mukherjee, S. A. A. Fakoorian, J. Huang, and A. L. Swindlehurst.
Principles of physical layer security in multiuser wireless networks:
A survey. CoRR, 2010.

[28] A. Mukherjee and A. Swindlehurst. Robust beamforming for security

in mimo wiretap channels with imperfect csi. IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 59(1):351–361, Jan 2011.

[29] G. Noubir, R. Rajaraman, B. Sheng, and B. Thapa. On the robustness

of ieee 802.11 rate adaptation algorithms against smart jamming. In
Proceedings of ACM WiSec ’11, pages 97–108.

[30] N. Patwari and S. K. Kasera. Robust location distinction using

temporal link signatures. In Proceedings of ACM MobiCom ’07,
pages 111–122.

[31] C. Peel, B. Hochwald, and A. Swindlehurst. A vector-perturbation

technique for near-capacity multiantenna multiuser
communication-part i: channel inversion and regularization. IEEE
Transactions on Communications, 53(1):195–202, 2005.

[32] R. Racic, D. Ma, H. Chen, and X. Liu. Exploiting and defending

opportunistic scheduling in cellular data networks. Mobile
Computing, IEEE Transactions on, 9(5):609–620, 2010.

[33] O. Regev. On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and

cryptography. In Proceedings of ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC ’05, pages 84–93.

[34] M. Schulz, A. Loch, and M. Hollick. Practical known-plaintext

attacks against physical layer security in wireless mimo systems. In
Proceedings of NDSS 2014.

[35] W.-L. Shen, Y.-C. Tung, K.-C. Lee, K. C.-J. Lin, S. Gollakota,

D. Katabi, and M.-S. Chen. Rate adaptation for 802.11 multiuser
mimo networks. In Proceedings of ACM MOBICOM ’12, pages
29–40.

[36] C. Shin, R. Heath, and E. Powers. Blind channel estimation for

mimo-ofdm systems. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
56(2):670–685, 2007.

[37] Y.-S. Shiu, S.-Y. Chang, H.-C. Wu, S.-H. Huang, and H.-H. Chen.

Physical layer security in wireless networks: a tutorial. IEEE
Wireless Communications, 18(2):66–74, 2011.

[38] D. Tse and P. Viswanath. Fundamentals of Wireless Communication.

Cambridge University Press, 2005.

[39] P. Ubaidulla and A. Chockalingam. Relay precoder optimization in

mimo-relay networks with imperfect csi. IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 59(11):5473–5484, Nov 2011.

[40] T. Wang and Y. Yang. Analysis on perfect location spooﬁng attacks
using beamforming. In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM ’13, pages
2778–2786.

[41] H. Weingarten, Y. Steinberg, and S. Shamai. The capacity region of
the gaussian multiple-input multiple-output broadcast channel. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 52:3936–3964, Sept 2006.
[42] L. Withers, R. Taylor, and D. Warme. Echo-mimo: A two-way
channel training method for matched cooperative beamforming.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 56(9):4419–4432, 2008.

[43] X. Xie, X. Zhang, and K. Sundaresan. Adaptive feedback

compression for mimo networks. In Proceedings of ACM MOBICOM
’13, pages 477–488.

[44] J. Xiong and K. Jamieson. Securearray: Improving wiﬁ security with

ﬁne-grained physical-layer information. In Proceedings of ACM
MobiCom ’13, pages 441–452.

[45] A. Yarali and B. Ahsant. 802.11n: The new wave in wlan technology.

In Proceedings of Mobility ’07, pages 310–316.

[46] T. Yoo and A. Goldsmith. On the optimality of multiantenna

broadcast scheduling using zero-forcing beamforming. IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications,, 24(3):528–541, 2006.

[47] J. Zhang, M. Kountouris, J. Andrews, and R. Heath. Achievable

throughput of multi-mode multiuser mimo with imperfect csi
constraints. In Proceedings of IEEE ISIT ’09., pages 2659–2663.

APPENDIX

Based on the ﬁnding in [33], the learning with error (LWE) prob-
lem is conjectured as a hard problem in that even quantum computa-
tion needs an exponential time to solve. Similar to the proof in [9],
we choose to reduce our CSIsec protocol to the LWE problem
under the Gaussian channel assumption. Given the system dimen-
sion n, some prime integer p ≤ poly(n), and an arbitrary number of
equations with error, the traditional LWE problem is:

(cid:104)s, a1(cid:105) ≈χ b1(mod p)
(cid:104)s, a1(cid:105) ≈χ b1(mod p)

...

(15)

where s ∈ Zn
p is the secret to recover, ai is chosen independently
p, and bi ∈ Zp is the result of inner-product of s and ai with
from Zn
additive error following a χ distribution. Based on Theorem 1.1 in
[33], this LWE problem can be reduced to the known shortest inde-
pendent vectors problem (SIVP) which is conjectured hard to solve
in linear time. Thus, reducing our problem to the LWE problem
also proves that CSIsec is hard to break.

Unlike the proof in [9], which tries to protect secure messages
via CSI, our target is to secure the unknown sequence U because
it is the crucial information that guarantees CSIsec to work as
shown in Section 6. For this purpose, we assume the unknown
sequence is drawn uniformly from discrete periodic constellation
such as M-PAM, and CSI is independent among clients which fol-
low a Gaussian distribution with zero mean. This assumption is
commonly used in wireless networks, especially in indoor environ-
ments where rich multipath communications exist. By mapping the
unknown sequence to s and CSI to ai, and by assuming the additive
noise follows the distribution of χ, our MU-MIMO problem can
be represented as an instance of the known LWE problem. Under
this setting, if any attacker, or multiple attackers, have an oracle to
recover the unknown sequence, s, from the received signal bi, then
this oracle can also be used to solve the known LWE problems as
shown in Eq. (15). Details of this reduction are omitted because
of space limit. This reduction shows that, under the assumption
that breaking CSIsec is equivalent to ﬁnding U (as argued in Sec-
tion 6), breaking CSIsec is as hard as solving the LWE problem,
which is conjectured hard to solve.

786