Empirical Analysis of Search Advertising Strategies

Bhanu C. Vattikonda

University of California, San Diego

bvattikonda@cs.ucsd.edu

Vacha Dave

Microsoft, Mountain View, California

vachad@microsoft.com

Saikat Guha

Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India

saikat@microsoft.com

Alex C. Snoeren

University of California, San Diego

snoeren@cs.ucsd.edu

ABSTRACT
Top search ad placement is the coin of today’s Internet services
realm. An entire industry of search engine marketing companies
have emerged to help advertisers optimize their ad campaigns to de-
liver high returns on investment, peddling a plethora of advertising
strategies. Yet, very little is publicly known about the effectiveness
of online search advertising, especially when trying to compare the
various campaign strategies used by advertisers.

This paper presents the ﬁrst

large-scale measurement of
the effectiveness—measured in terms of incremental conversion
gains—of online search ads. We develop a simple metric called
net acquisition beneﬁt (NAB) that admits comparisons between the
efﬁcacy of different ad campaign strategies without access to ad-
vertisers’ private ﬁnancial information. We study three common
campaign strategies used by advertisers on a large search ad net-
work: cannibalization, poaching, and ad extensions. Considering
data from a month in the last two years, we employ NAB to iden-
tify cases where these campaign strategies are justiﬁed. Advertisers
and ad agencies can replicate our methodology to apply it to other
strategies of interest.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.4 [Performance of Systems]: Measurement Techniques; H.3.5
[Online Information Services]: Web-based services

General Terms
Measurement

Keywords
Sponsored search; advertising effectiveness;

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
IMC’15, October 28–30, 2015, Tokyo, Japan.
c(cid:13) 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3848-6/15/10$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2815675.2815694.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Measuring the effectiveness of advertising is, in general, a hard
problem. As John Wanamaker famously quipped, “half the money
I spend on advertising is wasted; the trouble is I don’t know which
half.” Online search advertising holds out the promise of address-
ing this longstanding challenge by focusing spend on the right con-
sumers at the right time. The sheer scale of ﬁne-grained, user-
activity data that can be brought to bear (e.g., tracking every ad
click and every user action on advertisers’ site) allows advertisers
to reach populations of particular interest. Moreover, search queries
capture the intent of the user allowing more direct connections be-
tween the ad and the user action [26]. This tight relationship con-
trasts with traditional brand advertising where connections between
ads and purchases are more nebulous. Hence, it is no surprise that
search advertising accounts for over 40% of the $42 billion spent
in online ads in the US alone, and is growing at 18% annually [25].
Despite its ever-increasing prevalence, very little is publicly
known about the effectiveness of online search advertising. Indeed,
large advertisers have presented conﬂicting anecdotal evidence. As
recently as in April 2013, a study claimed that the estimated $51
million eBay spends on search ads is ineffective since they essen-
tially cannibalize clicks from organic search results: in the absence
of eBay’s ad the user would have clicked the eBay page in the
organic results [10]. Similarly, three Indian online apparel retail-
ers found that poaching each other’s users by advertising on their
competitors’ brand names was counterproductive; while they might
succeed in getting their competitors’ customers to click their ad, the
customers would typically not convert. For the few customers who
do end up making a purchase, the cost paid by the advertiser is too
high [7]. Despite these reports, ad networks and ad agencies main-
tain that poaching and cannibalizing organic clicks both have a net
positive return on investment [7]. Opinions are similarly mixed
in the mobile space, where many advertisers complain about acci-
dental clicks while ad networks defend the effectiveness of mobile
search ads [4, 6].

One factor contributing to these seemingly contradictory reports
is the current inability of anyone other than the advertisers them-
selves to determine if a particular advertising campaign is effec-
tive. Publishers and marketing ﬁrms deal in terms of metrics like
click-through ratio (CTR), which reports the number of clicks on
an ad as a fraction of the number of times the ad is shown, and cost
per acquisition (CPA), which reports an advertiser’s total spend di-
vided by the number of resulting purchases. Unfortunately, nei-
ther of these metrics lends insight to the key question—namely
whether a particular advertising campaign is proﬁtable for the ad-
vertiser or not, which is captured by the metric proﬁt per impression
(PPI). However, determining an ad campaign’s PPI fundamentally
requires knowledge of an advertiser’s cost and revenue structure—

79(a) Traditional search ad

(b) Ad with call extension

Figure 1: Examples of search ad types.

information they are likely loathe to share, even with their market-
ing agencies.

Instead, we present a simple metric—net acquisition beneﬁt
(NAB)—that leverages information about how much an advertiser
bids for ad placement (which, for rational advertisers, is a lower
bound on the proﬁt they expect) to estimate proﬁt per impression
(PPI). Using data about billions of clicks from a large search ad
network we conduct a month-long measurement study of the effec-
tiveness of three search ad campaign strategies—cannibalization,
poaching, and ad extensions—that are widely employed by adver-
tisers today.

We ﬁnd that the advertising landscape is quite nuanced: a given
campaign strategy may be effective for some advertisers but not
others. For instance, advertisers with well-established brands may
ﬁnd little beneﬁt in advertising on search queries mentioning their
brand, while less well-known brands may need to do so to pro-
tect themselves from competitors looking to poach their customers.
Similarly, ads on mobile devices may be more effective for busi-
nesses with brick-and-mortar storefronts than for businesses with
purely online presence. We hope that NAB will allow not only
advertisers but ad agencies and other third parties to replicate our
methodology to measure and compare other advertising strategies.

2. BACKGROUND

This section provides a brief overview of search advertising and
related concepts. Readers already familiar with search ads may
prefer to skip ahead and refer back to this section as needed.

Search ads and organic results. When a user types a search
query into a search engine like Google, Bing, or Yahoo!, the result-
ing page contains two types of listings. Organic search results—
traditionally understood to be the search results—are determined
by the search engine through proprietary heuristic algorithms; the
listed websites do not pay the search engine for placement or click-
throughs. Paid search results, on the other hand, which we refer
to as search ads, are typically sold by the search engine through
an auction mechanism where the destination website (i.e., adver-
tiser) bids for inclusion. The top paid search results are typically
displayed alongside organic search results and formatted to look
similar except for, e.g., a slightly different background shade, or a
‘Sponsored’ or ‘Ad’ label.

Content. The content of an ad includes at a minimum a title, the
advertiser’s domain name, and two short lines of descriptive text,
typically rendered in blue, green, and black, respectively as illus-
trated in Figure 1. The advertiser also provides the URL the user
should be directed to if the ad is clicked. Search engines increas-
ingly support ad extensions that allow advertisers to include addi-
tional information or actions in the rendered ad. The call extension,
for instance, allows an advertiser to provide a phone number; when
the ad is shown on a mobile phone, the extension is rendered as a
button that invokes the dialer as shown in Figure 1(b).

Targeting. Advertisers select individual keywords or phrases
that must be present in the (normalized) user search query for the
ad to be included in the ad auction. User search queries are normal-
ized to ﬁx misspellings, stem words, and resolve ambiguities using
various heuristics. The advertiser may further target their ad by de-

vice type, geographic region, time of day, and user demographics.
Targeting is often quite ﬁne-grained in practice, with top advertis-
ers managing tens of millions of keywords [10].

Campaigns and pricing. Ads are priced through an auction
mechanism that is designed to encourage advertisers to bid the
maximum amount they are willing to pay for a click. The amount
the advertiser is charged if the ad is clicked is based on the
next-lower-ranked bid in a form of generalized second-price auc-
tion [20]. The position of the ad on the results page is based on
some function of the bid and the probability the ad will be clicked
(e.g., based on historical click-through rates). Advertisers typically
manage bids for a group of related keywords and targeting criteria
through a logical construct called a campaign. Each bid is associ-
ated with a particular ad campaign, which can specify ﬁne-grained
bid modiﬁcations based upon device type and individual keywords.
Conversion. The purpose of an ad is obviously to drive revenue
to the advertiser. Conversion (or equivalently, acquisition) refers
to the user performing some desirable action on the advertiser’s
site after clicking the ad, e.g., signing up for a newsletter, purchas-
ing a product, or subscribing to a service. Sophisticated search-ad
networks assist advertisers in monitoring the effectiveness of their
campaigns by providing support for analytics.
In particular, the
advertiser can inform the search-ad network of a conversion event
by placing JavaScript code provided by the search-ad network on
the page on which the conversion happens. The JavaScript directs
the browser to contact the search-ad network’s server with a user
cookie which can then be used to link the conversion event to any
previous user actions performed on the search-ad network. The ad-
vertiser can track campaign performance along different types of
conversions by passing an opaque tag to the conversion JavaScript;
the search-ad network typically does not learn the semantics of the
tag or the value of the conversion and simply tallies the counts of
these opaque tags for the campaign.

3. METRIC

In this section we present NAB, a simple metric we use for mea-
suring the effectiveness of online search ads. Our primary goal is
to design a metric that can be used by ad networks, ad agencies,
or any entity that manages large search advertising campaigns. We
discuss the challenges in choosing the right metric to measure the
performance of ad campaigns. In particular, we address the fact that
details of customer transactions (e.g., proﬁt margins) may not be
available to the entities running the search engine marketing cam-
paigns for the advertisers.
3.1 Challenges

Our choice of metric for comparing the performance of different

advertising strategies is driven by the following challenges.
3.1.1 Advertiser diversity
Advertisers on our partner ad network span orders of magnitude
in terms of their scale. The effective cost per acquisition (CPA) for
an advertiser, computed as the total amount charged divided by the
total number of conversions, is a rough proxy for the monetary util-
ity the advertiser expects to derive from advertising [21]. Figure 2
plots the normalized CPA for advertisers reporting at least 10 con-
version events in our dataset vs. the total normalized money spent
by the advertiser; the values are normalized to the median value
along each axis. (Because each advertiser has at least 10 conver-
sions, there can be no points above the CPA = TotalSpend/10
diagonal.) As one might expect, different advertisers have vastly
different budgets. Both the total money spent by advertisers (x-
axis domain) and effective cost-per-acquisition (y-axis range) span

80by device type may help evaluate the effectiveness of advertising
on mobile devices, while aggregating data by query classiﬁcation
to, e.g., consider only ads placed on competitors’ brand names, may
help evaluate the impact of poaching.
3.2 Net acquisition beneﬁt (NAB)

Intuitively, the net acquisition beneﬁt (NAB) is the conversion
probability of a trafﬁc slice adjusted by its cost. We deﬁne NAB
for a trafﬁc slice x as follows:

NAB(x) = πx − νx
λ

,

where:

x, n : Trafﬁc slice x consisting of n impressions
= Conversion probability, i.e., #conversions
πx
= Average cost, i.e., cost
νx
n
= Advertiser’s target cost-per-acquisition
λ

n

λ is the maximum amount an advertiser would be willing to pay
for a conversion, which is well captured, for example, by their bid
in an ad auction (see Section 2). Obviously, a rational advertiser
would not want to pay more for an ad than they stand to make in
proﬁt on the conversion, so we argue that λ serves as a lower bound
for the proﬁt an advertiser expects to capture from a conversion.
Note that if λ precisely equals the advertiser’s proﬁt margin, then
NAB is proportional to proﬁt per impression (PPI).

NAB = 1 for an optimally beneﬁcial trafﬁc slice — where every
case results in a conversion (π = 1) and there is no cost (ν = 0).
NAB = 0 for trafﬁc slices that have no net beneﬁt, e.g., where the
trafﬁc slice is so expensive that the advertiser is willing to forgo
every conversion and save the entire cost (i.e., effective cost-per-
acquisition is λ and ν = λπ). For detrimental trafﬁc slices, e.g.,
there are no conversions (π = 0) and the advertiser is losing money
(ν > 0), NAB is negative. In practice, NAB is on the order of 10−2
in our real-world dataset. (Intuitively, this makes sense, as CTRs
are typically of the same order.)
3.3 Incremental NAB

The incremental net acquisition beneﬁt (INAB) measures the rel-
ative improvement in NAB of one trafﬁc slice over another, i.e., the
effectiveness of one ad campaign vs. another. Intuitively, it is the
change in conversion probability (∆π) adjusted by the change in
cost (∆ν). We deﬁne INAB for trafﬁc slice x over slice y as fol-
lows:

INAB(x | y) =

NAB(x) − NAB(y)

|NAB(y)|

INAB is deﬁned only for two comparable trafﬁc slices. That is,
INAB can be computed for two trafﬁc slices x and y belonging
to the same advertiser but not across advertisers. Trafﬁc slice x is
more beneﬁcial than y if and only if x has more net acquisition ben-
eﬁt than y, i.e., INAB(x | y) is positive. Slice x is less beneﬁcial
than y if INAB(x | y) is negative (or equivalently, INAB(y | x) is
positive). Both are equivalent if INAB(x | y) is zero.
3.4 Discussion

NAB approximates proﬁt per impression (PPI) when λ is equal
to proﬁt margin on conversion. But, unlike proﬁt per impression,
NAB does not require information about revenue derived and cost
of the products. This allows ad networks and ad agencies to use
the NAB metric to compare effectiveness of advertising campaigns.
Note that both NAB and PPI, being impression based, can be sensi-
tive to impression counts (impressions are cheap, one may argue).
However, an impression represents the most basic intervention to

Figure 2: Large spread in the normalized advertiser ad spend and
the normalized price they pay per conversion.

Figure 3: Top queries account for a small share of overall spend
illustrating the query diversity.

almost six orders of magnitude. Thus, our metric must take into
account an advertisers’ target cost per acquisition and allow com-
parison between different advertising strategies of an advertiser.
3.1.2 Statistical signiﬁcance
As mentioned, ad targeting can be extremely ﬁne-grained focus-
ing on speciﬁc keywords, device types, geographic regions, etc.
Figure 3 plots the probability density function of the share of total
advertising money spent on a sampling of the most popular key-
words (ordered by the amount of money spent on them). To il-
lustrate, note that the top keyword contributes to less than 0.2%
of the total spend. There is a heavy tail of keywords with the top
200 most-popular together accounting for less than 7% of the total
spend in the sample. Performing analysis at keyword granularity
results in poor statistical signiﬁcance. The statistical signiﬁcance is
lower still if the data is further sliced by user, device type, adver-
tiser and other targeting parameters.

Hence, any useful metric must be deﬁned over trafﬁc aggregates,
which we refer to as slices of search requests. The dimensions
along which the data should be aggregated depends upon the strat-
egy being evaluated. In general, we will consider slices that capture
a particular advertising campaign. For instance, aggregating data

0200040006000800010000QueryRank10−410−310−210−1100SpendShare(%)81user experience on behalf of advertisers, and in absence of a better
denominator, impression-based metrics are still considered indus-
try standard [2, 38].

CTR and CPA. Click-through ratio (CTR) and cost per acqui-
sition (CPA) are the two most commonly used metrics to evaluate
effectiveness of ad campaigns. CTR captures the effectiveness of
a campaign in attracting users but does not capture the beneﬁt of
attracting those users. It also does not capture the price that the
advertiser has to pay for the clicks. While CPA captures the qual-
ity of users being attracted, it does not capture the efﬁciency of the
campaign in attracting users overall, something that CTR captures.
We ﬁnd that NAB captures the performance of a campaign bet-
ter than both CTR and CPA. In particular, NAB is robust to the
diversity of advertisers and sparsity of query-level data found in
our dataset. It has been observed [12, 24] that even large search
engines have very sparse data when aggregated by user queries.
NAB allows comparisons between different advertising strategies
of a given advertiser and can be applied to any slice of trafﬁc with
sufﬁcient data.

Target cost per acquisition. One subtlety with NAB is that ad-
vertisers could have different target costs per acquisition for differ-
ent ad campaigns. We discuss our methodology for inferring target
cost per acquisition in next section.

4. DATA AND METHODOLOGY

This section describes the dataset we use and the methodol-
ogy we follow for measuring effectiveness of various ad campaign
strategies in the subsequent sections.
4.1 Dataset

Our dataset sample is several terabytes in size, consisting of bil-
lions of search and ad clicks on a large search ad network in the
United States English language market. We report upon clicks cap-
turing all actions taken by hundreds of millions of users who issue
hundreds of millions of unique English-language queries over a pe-
riod of four contiguous weeks within the last two years. (Analysis
of a different four-week time period obtains qualitatively similar re-
sults.) The dataset contains a representative sample of clicks from
desktops, tablets and phones. Our dataset sample covers many mil-
lions of dollars in advertising spend1 by hundreds of thousands of
advertisers. Our dataset does not cover specialized search verticals
like image, video and map, or product listings.

For each click our dataset includes the following anonymized in-
i) the normalized search query issued by the user and
formation:
the search ad network’s internal query classiﬁcation; ii) information
about the browser including version and operating system, device
form factor iii) the list of organic search results and paid search
ads that were presented to the user; iv) the details of the associated
ad campaign including bid amounts, keywords targeted, and ad ex-
tensions; v) the organic search results or paid search ads on which
the user actually clicked (if any) including clicks on multiple re-
sults and ads; and, lastly, for ads clicked, vi) the second-price bid
charged to the advertiser along with any advertiser-reported con-
version event(s) for that click along with the URL of the pages for
which the user conversion was reported and the (opaque) conver-
sion types.

Along with click data, the analytics system collects user activity
data on advertiser websites to track the performance of their ad
campaigns. Whenever a user performs an action that the advertiser

1We are obliged to report only the magnitude or normalized values
for some sensitive quantities when doing so does not compromise
the scientiﬁc value of our results.

wants to track, JavaScript embedded in the page sends information
about the action—along with a user cookie allowing the data to be
connected to the user’s search behavior—to the ad network. This
system allows advertisers to declare which user actions constitute
conversions.

4.2 Methodology

In order to compute NAB we infer target cost per conversion (λ)
and conversion rate of trafﬁc acquired organically from the data.
We aggregate data over queries that identify trafﬁc representing dif-
ferent advertising strategies.

Conversions. In order to identify the conversions that an adver-
tiser obtains from a slice of trafﬁc we have to attribute the conver-
sion to a speciﬁc prior search. For this, we identify the user actions
on the search engine prior to the conversion event on the advertiser
website. We then attribute the conversion to the latest user click (re-
gardless of whether the click was on an organic result or a search
ad) that led the user to the advertiser’s website—as long as the click
happened in the 24 hours prior to the conversion event.

Not all advertisers report conversion signals, or not in signiﬁ-
cant numbers. Unless otherwise mentioned, we omit advertisers
for whom we have less than 30 conversion reports in our dataset
sample.

Inferring target cost per acquisition. Recall from Section 2
that advertisers place a bid which is the maximum amount they
are willing to pay for a click. We infer the maximum amount the
advertiser is willing to pay for a conversion (λ) by dividing their
total bid amount for the ads clicked by the number of conversions
they received. Since the bid values are always more than the actual
cost of advertising, overall NAB for any advertiser is always posi-
tive. Note that by making this choice we consider all conversions
that the advertiser receives in US English market—irrespective of
campaign—equivalent.

Aggregating queries. NAB must be computed over a signiﬁ-
cant aggregation of trafﬁc. As mentioned earlier, individual search
queries are too granular. We follow the search-ad network’s internal
classiﬁcation scheme [41] to aggregate queries into the following
four classes of particular interest: navigational, local, commercial,
and other, which includes informational queries.

Since the ad network’s internal query classiﬁer uses heuristics,
we verify the correctness of classiﬁcation by manually investigat-
ing a representative sample. In all we manually verify 200 queries
and ﬁnd that in the large majority of cases (94%) our manual la-
bel matches the classiﬁer’s; in the remaining 6% of the cases we
believe the classiﬁer misclassiﬁed the query. We compute the
sensitivity and speciﬁcity measures for classiﬁcation of naviga-
tional queries and ﬁnd that that 77% of the time, a navigational
query is classiﬁed as navigational, whereas 4% of the time, a non-
navigational query is classiﬁed as navigational. Overall, the query
classiﬁcation—while not perfect—seems sufﬁciently accurate for
the purposes of our study.

Trafﬁc slices. In subsequent sections we compare the effective-
ness of various campaign strategies used by advertisers by compar-
ing the beneﬁts across different trafﬁc slices. Each slice of trafﬁc is
deﬁned by the query classiﬁcation, device type, the position of the
advertiser in the organic results (if at all), whether the advertiser’s
ad is shown or not, and whether the call button was present for the
ad or organic result (in the case of mobile devices). Table 1 lists
these features and describes the values they take. Table 2 labels
the various combinations of these features with a name that we use
to refer to that trafﬁc slice in subsequent sections. We discuss our
choice of the trafﬁc slices in Section 8.

82Query
nav
com
all
Device

Organic

phone Mobile smartphones
Desktops and laptops
pc
all
All devices

Navigational query; user seeks speciﬁc site
Commercial query; user has purchase intent
All queries

yes
no
top
poor
n
n+
all

yes
no

Ad

Ext. (set)

Present in ﬁrst page of results
Not in ﬁrst page of results
Top-most organic search result
Ranked 2 or worse, or not on ﬁrst page
Ranked n
Ranked n or worse
All cases whether present or not

Ad present
Ad not present

ad:call Ad has call button
org:call Organic result had call button
ad:comp Competitor has an ad

Table 1: Trafﬁc features used to deﬁne trafﬁc slices

Query Device Org. Ad

all
all
nav
nav
nav
nav
all

Slice
Section 5: Cannibalizing Organic
org-n-noad
org-n-ad
nav-noad
nav-ad
nav-comp-noad
nav-comp-ad
noorg-ad
Section 6: Poaching
poach-ad
poach-noad
commerce-ad
Section 7: Ad Extensions
phone-orgcall
phone-org
phone-ad
phone-adcall
phone-noorg-ad
phone-noorg-adcall
phone-orgcall-adcall

all
all
all
all
all
all
all

nav
nav
com

pc
pc
pc
pc
pc
pc
pc

pc
pc
pc

phone
phone
phone
phone
phone
phone
phone

n
n
top
top
top
top
no

poor
poor
all

yes
yes
all
all
no
no
all

no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
yes

yes
no
yes

no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Ext.

ad:comp
ad:comp

org:call

ad:call

ad:call
org:call,
ad:call

Table 2: Trafﬁc slices used in this paper

5. CANNIBALIZING ORGANIC TRAFFIC
We refer to the scenario where advertisers show ads for queries
where they have an organic presence as cannibalization: in the ab-
sence of ads, users could have navigated to the advertiser using
organic results. We consider three particular scenarios of cannibal-
ization and use NAB to measure the beneﬁts of each. We ﬁnd that,
i) for queries where the advertiser is the top result 56% of the adver-
tisers derive no beneﬁt from advertising, ii) the incremental beneﬁt
of advertising increases as the organic rank of advertiser decreases
and iii) over 61% of the advertisers achieve limited beneﬁt by ad-
vertising on navigational queries.
5.1 Improving visibility

In this section we consider the general case of searches where
the user does not already have a particular destination website (ad-
vertiser) in mind. In such an instance, even though an advertiser’s

Figure 4: Most advertisers see little to no beneﬁt in advertising for
queries where they are the top result.

Figure 5: 56% advertisers achieve zero or negative INAB by ad-
vertising on queries where advertiser is the top result.

site appears in the organic search results, the advertiser may wish to
increase its visibility to induce the user to visit its site as opposed
to a competitor’s. We consider an advertiser to be attempting to
improve their visibility if the advertiser chooses to display an ad
despite already being included in the organic results likely to be
considered by the user (i.e., ranked in the top ten organic results
which are chosen based on their relevance to the user query).

Same-query visibility

5.1.1
The main challenge in measuring the impact of advertising is
obtaining comparable search impressions. In the ideal scenario we
would compare user actions in the presence and absence of an ad
while everything else remains the same. Since we do not have such
data, we compare the performance of ads by comparing beneﬁts
of advertising over two sets of impressions for the same query,
one with ads and one without ads. Comparing user actions over
impressions for the same query ensures that the most signiﬁcant
variable—the user query—remains the same in both sample sets.

We begin by considering the effectiveness of advertising when an
advertiser is already the top organic search result. For each (adver-
tiser, query) pair, where advertiser is the top organic result for that

10−410−310−210−1NAB(query-org-1-noad)10−410−310−210−1NAB(query-org-1-ad)−1.0−0.50.00.51.0INAB(query-org-1-ad|query-org-1-noad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF83(a) Rank 1

(b) Rank 3

(c) Rank 5

Figure 6: The beneﬁts of cannibalizing organic clicks increase with decreasing organic search ranking.

query, we identify impressions with and without ads by the adver-
tiser. I.e., a single advertiser may be considered multiple times if
they are the top search result for more than one query. Figure 4
plots the NAB of advertising (query-org-1-ad) vs. not advertis-
ing (query-org-1-noad) for all (advertiser, query) pairs where we
have more than 30 conversions (as discussed in Section 4). In our
dataset, we have 824 (advertiser, query) pairs covering 345 distinct
advertisers. The diagonal line represents an INAB of zero, i.e., the
effectiveness of advertising is equivalent to the effectiveness of not
advertising for that advertiser. Advertising is more effective than
not for advertisers above the diagonal. A slight majority are below
the line where the inverse is true—i.e., it is not worth advertising
for that query. The dashed red curves above and below the diago-
nal are intended to aide comparison as the graph spans four orders
of magnitude on each axis: they represent a ∆NAB (NAB(ad) -
NAB(noad)) of +0.01 and −0.01 respectively.

As an alternative representation of the same data, Figure 5 plots
the CDF of the corresponding INAB metric. Recall that INAB is
normalized to the NAB of the base strategy, so a value of 1.0 repre-
sents a 2× improvement. For 56% of the (advertiser, query) pairs
the corresponding advertiser gets zero or negative incremental ben-
eﬁt by advertising on the query (i.e., fall below the diagonal in Fig-
ure 4). Again, this means that these advertisers should reconsider
advertising on those queries.

5.1.2 Over all queries
The constraint of comparing the beneﬁts of advertising by hold-
ing the user query a constant limits our analysis to a few advertis-
ers who have signiﬁcant number of conversions for the same query.
Even for those advertisers, these few queries contribute to a small
proportion of their entire ad spend. Hence, there is reason to be-
lieve the same-query results may not be representative. By design,
we can apply our metric to measure effectiveness of ads on an arbi-
trary slice of trafﬁc. Here we expand our analysis to compare trafﬁc
slices where the advertiser has a particular rank in organic results,
irrespective of user query.

Figure 6 considers only non-navigational queries (i.e., those
where the user likely does not have a particular destination website
in mind) and plots NAB of advertising (org-n-ad) vs. not advertis-
ing (org-n-noad) aggregated across all queries for each advertiser
(i.e., each advertiser is a single data point) where we have sufﬁcient
data as described in Section 4. We separate campaigns based upon
their rank in organic results. Figure 6(a) considers the aggregate
performance of all non-navigational queries for which an advertiser

Figure 7: As rank increases in organic results beneﬁts of cannibal-
istic advertising turn positive, albeit only slightly.

anyway obtains the top organic result (c.f. Figure 4 which shows a
distinct point for each unique top-result-producing query an adver-
tiser may obtain). Figures 6(b) and 6(c) show the same comparison
for campaigns where the advertiser appears third or ﬁfth in organic
search results, respectively.

Figure 7 plots the CDFs of the corresponding INAB metrics
for each of the three classes of campaign considered in Figure 6.
In contrast to the same-query results above, most of the advertis-
ers gain by advertising for non-navigational queries despite be-
ing present in the organic results. This is likely because non-
navigational queries tend to be competed for more aggressively and
users are ﬂexible with choosing any business that meets their needs.
Also, while the relative beneﬁt (i.e., INAB) of advertising increase
as the organic rank drops, the absolute beneﬁts (i.e., NAB) of ad-
vertising are very low.

Interestingly, for 32% of the top-ranked websites, there appear
to be signiﬁcant beneﬁts to advertising (INAB > 50%). Manual
investigations ﬁnd that these advertisers belong to two categories.
One set of advertisers have less-well-recognized brands. If a more
well recognized brand advertises for the query, and is thus placed
above the top-ranked organic result, the latter lose out. The other
category of advertisers who gain are those who share their brand
with other advertisers. For example, car manufacturers lose poten-
tial converting users to competing ads placed by car dealers trying
to attract the same users. For 19% of the top-ranked websites, ad-
vertising is a drain on their ad spend (INAB < 0) since they end up
competing on hotly contested queries resulting in higher cost per
acquisition than their overall average.

10−410−310−210−1100NAB(org-1-noad)10−410−310−210−1100NAB(org-1-ad)10−410−310−210−1100NAB(org-3-noad)10−410−310−210−1100NAB(org-3-ad)10−410−310−210−1100NAB(org-5-noad)10−410−310−210−1100NAB(org-5-ad)−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.0INAB(org-n-ad|org-n-noad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFRank1Rank3Rank584Figure 9: INAB has no correlation with CTR and most advertisers
receive a high click through rate on navigational queries.

vertisers, advertising on navigational queries for which they are the
top organic result is a net loss when compared to not advertising
(i.e., INAB is < 0). In 9% of the cases, however, such advertising
bears signiﬁcant fruit (INAB is > 25%).

Our ﬁnding that 61% of advertisers receive limited bene-
ﬁt (INAB approximately zero) from advertising on navigational
queries vs. not advertising squarely contradicts reports from other
ad networks that suggest 89% of ad clicks are incremental, and
would be lost without advertising [13]. We reconcile these results
by observing that the previous study [13] does not consider con-
versions and focuses solely on clicks. Indeed, the study’s authors
explicitly state that advertisers should consider conversions since
relying on clicks alone may be misleading. We show below that ad-
vertising on navigational queries does, in fact, inﬂate click counts
without increasing conversions for the vast majority of advertisers.
Another reason for the divergent result is that the previous study
considers campaigns that are paused due to budget shortage. This
would bias the choice of campaigns towards very small advertisers
who would not have strong presence for navigational queries.

For advertisers that value conversions, however, our data discred-
its conventional wisdom that promotes advertising on navigational
queries for which the advertiser is the top organic result. Finally,
while our general ﬁnding is consistent with experimental evidence
from large advertisers including eBay [10], we nevertheless encour-
age advertisers to conduct their own experiments and track conver-
sions to determine if they belong to the small (9%) set of advertis-
ers for whom advertising on navigational queries brings signiﬁcant
beneﬁts. These advertisers, as we discussed in Section 5.1.2, either
have a weaker brand or are competing against other advertisers who
can legitimately advertise on their brand.
5.3 Click count inﬂation

Many advertisers appear to optimize for clicks rather than con-
versions. While we can only speculate as to why they choose to do
so, anecdotal evidence ranges from naïveté, e.g., unawareness of
metrics other than the click-through rate, to ﬁnancial, e.g., ad agen-
cies that collect commission per-click and advertisers that specify
CTRs and minimum click counts (rather than conversions) in con-
tracts with such agencies [3]. One of the easiest ways for advertis-
ers to inﬂate ad click counts is to cannibalize the advertiser’s own
navigational queries.

Figure 9 plots achieved click-through rate of campaigns that ad-
vertise on an advertiser’s own navigational queries as a function
of their INAB. While the INAB of such a strategy is close to zero
for the vast majority of campaigns as one would expect, the click-
through rate for these campaigns is extremely high as compared to
typical search ad CTRs of around 1-2% [5]. Advertisers should run

(a) Advertising for navigational queries.

(b) INAB of navigational queries.

Figure 8: The incremental beneﬁt of advertising for navigational
queries is very small for most advertisers.

5.2 Navigational queries

A subset of queries (explicitly excluded above) for which an ad-
vertiser is the top organic result is known as navigational queries—
i.e., the user is using the search engine as a way to navigate to the
advertiser’s site. We consider a given query navigational for an ad-
vertiser if: i) the search query is classiﬁed by the search ad network
as navigational, i.e., the user query includes branded terms or key-
words (e.g., Amazon or Facebook) that suggests the user is seeking
a speciﬁc website, and ii) the advertiser is the top-most organic re-
sult for that query. Here, we consider whether it is effective for a
website to advertise for queries where the user is explicitly seeking
to navigate to the advertiser website.

Figure 8(a) plots the NAB of advertising (nav-ad) versus not
advertising (nav-noad) for all advertisers where we have at least
30 conversions attributed to clicks following queries matching the
above criteria. Figure 8(b) plots the same data as a CDF of the
INAB of advertising over not advertising on these queries. As
is evident from points clustering along the diagonal in the scatter
plot, the majority of advertisers (61%) receive very little incremen-
tal beneﬁt (less than 10%) from advertising on navigational queries
where they are the top organic result. Moreover, for 32% of ad-

10−410−310−210−1NAB(nav-noad)10−410−310−210−1NAB(nav-ad)−1.0−0.50.00.51.0INAB(nav-ad|nav-noad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF−1.0−0.50.00.51.0INAB(nav-ad|nav-noad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CTR85(a) Poaching offense.

(b) Poaching defense.

(c) Alternative to poaching.

Figure 10: Poaching often leads to wasteful spend and defending against it is not worthwhile either. A better alternative is to try to gain
users on commercial queries where there is no organic presence.

carefully calibrated A/B tests to determine the incremental bene-
ﬁt of advertising for queries where the user is already looking to
navigate to the advertiser.

6. POACHING COMPETITOR TRAFFIC

Poaching refers to advertising strategies that involve bidding
on navigational queries speciﬁcally seeking a competitor’s web-
site (e.g., queries with competitor’s trademarked terms or brand
names). Initially, Google’s trademark usage policy prevented ad-
vertisers from bidding on trademarked keywords they did not own
or from using them in their ad content; the restriction of bidding
on competitors’ trademarked keywords was relaxed in 2004—even
if the trademark owner explicitly objected—and restrictions on us-
ing them in ad content were relaxed in 2009 [1, 2]. The relaxed
policy effectively increased the cost per click of trademarked key-
words by allowing competition from third parties, thereby increas-
ing trademark owners’ costs by compelling them to bid defensively
to protect their trademark.

We ﬁnd that poaching may help smaller advertisers get users who
would not navigate to the advertiser in the absence of ads. But, the
costs of attempting to gain such users may be too high for some
advertisers when compared to the cost they pay for an average con-
version. Moreover, given the varied effectiveness of poaching, de-
fending against poaching has uneven results and can, in fact, occa-
sionally lead to negative results due to the high cost of defense.
6.1 Offense

Here, we analyze the beneﬁt of trying to poach users seeking
to navigate to a competitor. Figure 10(a) compares the NAB for
poaching ads (poach-ad, i.e., ads on navigational queries where
the advertiser is not the top-most organic search result) against the
NAB of not advertising on the same queries (poach-noad, i.e., navi-
gational queries where the advertiser has an organic presence but is
not the top-most organic result, and does not display an ad). Each
data point represents an advertiser where we have sufﬁcient conver-
sion data. About half the advertisers fall below the diagonal show-
ing that poaching is actually detrimental. For the half that do see
relative gains over not advertising, the absolute beneﬁts are negli-
gible (note the absolute value of NAB is generally below 0.01).

Figure 11 plots the CDF of the INAB for these advertisers. For
50% of advertisers, poaching is of negative value—likely due to
few conversions and high costs associated with such ads. There

Figure 11: For most advertisers, poaching competitor’s naviga-
tional queries yields little beneﬁt, while some see extreme gains.

are however, a minority that see signiﬁcant gains relative to their
performance when ads are not shown. This is due to the very poor
rate at which they obtain trafﬁc when they do not show ads; said
another way, while the relative gains are substantial, in absolute
terms they still do not receive many conversions.
6.2 Defense

Regardless of how effective poaching is for the advertiser, com-
petitors may still be harmed because they value lost conversions
more dearly. Here, we consider whether it is useful for an adver-
tiser to defend against potential poaching by out-bidding competi-
tors for ad space despite being the top organic result for a naviga-
tional query. This data represents a speciﬁc scenario of advertising
for navigational queries (discussed in Section 5.2) where a competi-
tor ad is also present. We consider an advertiser a potential victim
of poaching for a given query if: i) the search query is classiﬁed
as navigational, i.e., the user query includes branded terms (e.g.,
Amazon or Macys) that suggests the user is seeking a speciﬁc web-
site, ii) the advertiser is the top-most organic result for that query,
and iii) another advertiser advertises on the query.

Figure 10(b) compares the NAB of defensive ads (nav-comp-ad,
i.e., ads on navigational queries where the advertiser is the top-
most organic search result) against the NAB of not advertising on
the same queries (nav-comp-noad). Figure 12 plots the CDF of
the INAB for these advertisers. The results are mixed: 20% of
advertisers realize signiﬁcant (INAB > 25%) beneﬁts, while a 32%
are negatively impacted by attempting to defend these queries.

010−410−310−2NAB(poach-noad)−10−2−10−3−10−4010−410−310−2NAB(poach-ad)10−410−310−210−1NAB(nav-comp-noad)10−410−310−210−1NAB(nav-comp-ad)−10−1−10−3010−310−1NAB(poach-ad)-NAB(poach-noad)−10−1−10−3010−310−1NAB(noorg-ad)−3−2−10123INAB(poach-ad|poach-noad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF86(a) Beneﬁt of listing.

(b) Ad call when organic call is present.

(c) Beneﬁt of call ad over regular ad.

Figure 13: Listing business details beneﬁts advertisers and in the presence of organic call options, ad call extensions yield mixed results.
But, showing an ad with extension is more beneﬁcial than a regular ad.

Figure 12: The beneﬁts of defending against poaching vary dra-
matically across advertisers.

Figure 14: Listing a business in local results brings clear beneﬁt to
advertisers.

6.3 Spending smarter

As an alternative to poaching a competitor’s customers (i.e.,
users who have issued a navigational search query for a compet-
ing website), an advertiser might try instead to recruit customers
who are likely to convert somewhere, but have not yet decided on
a particular vendor. Here we consider an advertiser deciding be-
tween spending money on poaching ads vs. spending that money
to compete on commercial queries (i.e., those that are likely to lead
to conversions) where they may not be prominently ranked in the
organic results, Figure 10(c) plots the additional beneﬁt of adver-
tising on commercial queries where the advertiser does not have an
organic presence i.e. NAB(noorg-ad) vs. the beneﬁt of poaching
ads over not poaching (NAB(poach-ad) - NAB(poach-noad)). For
78% of the advertisers, advertising on commercial queries where
the advertiser has no organic presence dominates poaching by a
wide margin (i.e., the are signiﬁcantly above the diagonal).

7. DISPLAYING AD EXTENSIONS

Call extensions allow advertisers to explicitly add a call button
to their ads when rendered on mobile phones. Call buttons are also
shown for business listings in the organic search results. These
features are provided by our partner ad network for no additional
cost to the advertisers. We have limited data for different advertis-
ing strategies on mobile devices. However, our preliminary results
show that creating a business listing, which would allow the ad net-
work to show a call button in organic results, is beneﬁcial to the

advertisers. The effect of adding a call button to an ad when an
organic result with call button is already present is mixed.
7.1 Organic business listings

Businesses can create a (free) listing that includes their loca-
tion, phone number, store hours, parking information, and payment
methods accepted through the network’s “Places for Business” por-
tal or third-parties like Yelp. The ad network uses this structured
information to enhance the presentation of organic results including
showing the call button, map directions, and so on.

We ﬁrst look at the effectiveness of the call button for organic
business listings vs. plain search results. It is challenging, how-
ever, to deﬁne conversion rates in these scenarios. We obviously
have no way of knowing from the search logs how many users that
call the business end up converting in a way that is equivalent to
the conversions in previous sections; here, we consider the simple
act of a user contacting the business by clicking the call button as
a conversion event for the purposes of computing the NAB. For
organic listings without call buttons, however, no similar data is
available. Instead, we substitute the conversion rate the advertisers
obtain when they advertise on local queries. While conversions are
potentially an undercount when compared to calls, we hope that
using the conversion rate for ads as opposed to organic clicks re-
stores some of the balance, offering a reasonable baseline of user
engagement.

Figure 13(a) plots the NAB of having an organic call button
(phone-orgcall) vs NAB of plain search results (phone-org) for
searches performed on mobile phones. Note that since both NABs

10−310−210−1NAB(phone-org)10−310−210−1NAB(phone-orgcall)10−1100NAB(phone-orgcall)10−1100NAB(phone-orgcall-adcall)−10−4010−410−310−210−1NAB(phone-noorg-ad)−10−4010−410−310−210−1NAB(phone-noorg-adcall)−1.0−0.50.00.51.0INAB(nav-comp-ad|nav-comp-noad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF020406080100INAB(phone-orgcall|phone-org)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF87Figure 15: When organic call is already listed, advertising with a
call ad has mixed results.

Figure 16: When advertiser does not have organic presence, ad-
vertising with a call button is more beneﬁcial.

are for organic results—for which businesses do not pay—the cost
term in the NAB computation is zero, and NAB reduces to conver-
sions per impression. Figure 14 plots the CDF of the INAB of call
button over plain results. As evident from the ﬁgures, median con-
versions per impression increases by a factor of 10 when a organic
call result is present.
7.2 Ads with call extensions

When an advertiser chooses to place a call button in an ad, it is
possible the ad results in a conversion off-line; i.e., rather than nav-
igating to the website and converting, the user may instead call the
advertiser and “convert” by making a purchase or similar analogous
activity without further web interaction. Hence, when considering
conversions for ads with call extensions, we deﬁne a conversion
event to be either a call or an advertiser-reported conversion. For
the very few impressions that result in both, we report only one
conversion.

Figure 13(b) compares the NAB of mobile search ads with call
extensions (phone-orgcall-adcall) vs. the NAB of organic business
listings with call buttons (phone-orgcall) for the very few busi-
nesses in our dataset that both advertise call extensions as well as
created an organic listing, as well as reported a sufﬁcient number
of conversion events. Figure 15 plots the CDF of the correspond-
ing INAB. We ﬁnd that even if organic search results contain a call
button extension, ads employing the same are effective for 74% of
advertisers, but ineffective for the remaining 26%. The orders-of-
magnitude larger NAB (and INAB) values in this section can be
attributed to the relative paucity of data for results using the call
extension.

For businesses that do not have a rank high enough to be listed
in the organic results, Figure 13(c) compares the NAB of mobile
search ads with call extensions (phone-noorg-adcall) vs. the NAB

Figure 17: Call ads on mobile are better than regular desktop ads
in the absence of organic presence.

of ads without the call extension (phone-noorg-ad). Figure 16 plots
the CDF of the corresponding INAB. We ﬁnd that ads with a call
extension are universally more effective.

Preliminary data suggests that there are mixed beneﬁts to using
call extensions for businesses where organic listings include call
button. For businesses that do not have a high-enough organic rank
for their listing to appear in the ﬁrst page of ads, however, there
is a consistent boost from call extensions in search ads. That be-
ing said, since call extensions and business listings are both recent
features and very few advertisers have opted-in to both, our results
are preliminary and we encourage advertisers to conduct their own
experiments and compute their respective INABs to assess the ef-
fectiveness of the call extension in their speciﬁc case.
7.3 Spending smarter

In closing, we compare the marginal beneﬁt of call extensions
in mobile ads to the beneﬁt of traditional advertising on comput-
ers. As we discussed previously, the beneﬁt of the latter depends
tremendously on the position of the advertiser in the organic search
results. As an optimistic estimate, we focus on an advertiser who
appears sixth in the organic search results. Speciﬁcally, Figure 17
plots the marginal beneﬁt of running mobile ads with call extension
over organic business listings with call button (phone-noorg-adcall)
vs. advertising on desktops and laptops. For 75% of the advertisers
in our dataset, it is (modestly) more beneﬁcial to focus on mobile
call ads vs. desktop ads.

While we have limited data in our dataset, our initial assessment
indicates greater beneﬁts can be obtained by adding call buttons to
ads on mobile compared to traditional advertising on desktop when
organic presence is poor.

8. DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss our choice of using aggregated trafﬁc
slices and the underlying systemic bias that exists in the way the
trafﬁc slices are chosen for comparison.

−3−2−10123INAB(phone-orgcall-adcall|phone-orgcall)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF−100−50050100INAB(phone-noorg-adcall|phone-noorg-ad)0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDF10−310−2NAB(org-6-ad)-NAB(org-6-noad)10−310−2NAB(phone-noorg-adcall)888.1 Choosing trafﬁc slices

The techniques that we use in this paper can be applied to es-
timate the proﬁtability achieved by an advertiser over an arbitrary
slice of trafﬁc that is representative of a particular advertising strat-
egy. To measure the effectiveness of advertising, we identify sim-
ilar search impressions with and without ads. For this, an ideal
comparison would require impressions where the presence of an
ad is the only distinguishing attribute. However, even the largest
search engines have only sparse data when aggregated at the query
level [24].
In order to have reasonable samples of impressions,
we aggregate impressions by the category of user query. Note that
the techniques we discuss in this paper can however be applied to
trafﬁc slices aggregated on other attributes like geography or user
characteristics.
8.2 Systemic biases

A source of bias in our analyses is that queries for which ads are
shown are often more representative of the advertiser than queries
where ads are not shown for comparable trafﬁc slices. This is be-
cause whenever ads are shown, both the ad network and advertiser
ﬁnd the query relevant. But, when ads are not shown, the ad net-
work ﬁnds query relevant to advertiser but advertiser does not. So,
whenever results returned by the ad network are poor, users are less
likely to choose the advertiser from organic results hence lowering
NAB for the trafﬁc slice without ads.

An exception to this rule is when the advertiser tries to poach
users looking for a competitor (Section 6.1). This is because in case
of poaching, while the impressions with advertiser ad are likely to
be more attractive to the advertiser, they also cost more.

Finally, in Section 7 queries for which the ad network presents
a result with a call button are often more relevant to a mobile user
than queries where a web result is delivered; hence, the NAB for
organic search results with call buttons may be overstated.
9. RELATED WORK

Measuring ad effectiveness. There have been a number of
studies measuring the effectiveness of display advertising ad cam-
paigns [27, 29]. These studies measure the incremental impact of
advertising by creating a treatment and a control group. We take a
similar approach by identifying comparable trafﬁc slices and then
measuring the incremental impact of advertising.

Reiley, Lewis and Rao have also highlighted the challenges in
conducting such studies [30, 31] and how the beneﬁts of advertising
can be overestimated. They highlight this by studying the impact
of display ads on user activity. They show that presence of display
ads is not necessarily correlated with subsequent user activity. A
key reason is that display ads are expected to perform by their mere
presence in the absence of explicit expression of intent by the user.
In case of web search, however, advertiser pays the search engine
only when there is an ad click and user intent is captured through
the query made by the user. So, a subsequent conversion can be
attributed to a click performed by the user on search engine results
— sponsored or organic.

Absolute metrics. Advertising effectiveness has traditionally
been measured in absolute terms, e.g., click through rates [14, 22,
37, 40] or conversion rates [11, 36]. Other work focuses on preva-
lence [9] or effectiveness of different advertising strategies like mo-
bile advertising [18, 39] or the interaction between ads and organic
search results [10, 44]. Since different metrics focus on different di-
mensions of the campaign, comparing them is not straightforward.
NAB is also an absolute metric, however it explicitly addresses the
multi-dimensional comparison problem by converting other dimen-
sions (i.e., cost) into the primary dimension (conversion probabil-

ity) through a conversion factor (λ) that explicitly tracks the adver-
tiser’s relative utility across dimensions.

Incremental metrics. The Incremental Ad Clicks metric [13]
and the related one for mobiles [32] take a novel approach by
proposing a way to compare two trafﬁc slices. We were inspired
by IAC but ultimately identiﬁed the severe limitations in the gen-
eral approach relating to:
i) ignoring conversions, ii) being ill-
conditioned to noise; and iii) not scaling to the orders of magni-
tude difference in advertiser scale. NAB and INAB are designed to
address these challenges. We were also inspired by work in cost-
effectiveness analysis in the health sector [43].

Other use cases. Our work complements the large body of work
in the space of ad optimizations. Researchers have described a
methodology for A/B testing in context of controlled experiments
online for fairer comparisons [19]. INAB complements this work
by providing a metric that enables direct comparison of the relative
effectiveness of the two tests. [8] develops strategies that adver-
tisers may use to modify bid amounts. Incorporating NAB in the
bidding strategy may allow for joint optimizations in cost and con-
versions. A large body of work has looked at identifying fraud in
online ads [15, 16, 17, 23, 28, 33, 34, 35, 42]. NAB of various sus-
picious trafﬁc slices may be used as an additional signal in these
techniques.

10. FUTURE WORK

In this section we discuss areas where the NAB metric can be

reﬁned and outline future work.

Multiple types of conversions.

In this paper we treat all the
conversion events of an advertiser equivalently. If an advertiser has
multiple types of conversions she is interested in, she would need
to compute the NAB for each type of conversion, and those NABs
would not be mutually comparable. One approach would be to al-
low the advertiser to specify the relative value of each conversion
and extend NAB to allow different types of conversions to be traded
off against one another to arrive at the net NAB across all conver-
sion types.

Probabilistic NAB and brand advertising. As deﬁned NAB
can be applied most readily to search ads since every impression,
click and conversion can be tracked precisely and with certainty. In
traditional brand advertising, simply estimating impression counts
is a hard problem (e.g., TV viewers going to the restroom during
commercial breaks), let alone tracking conversions. It may, how-
ever, be possible to arrive at probabilistic estimates of impressions,
and conversions. One approach could be to extend NAB to in-
corporate probabilistic inputs and output the expected NAB with
conﬁdence intervals.

What-if analysis. In our design of NAB we consider only point-
in-time values and do not leverage the longitudinal perspective our
historical data provides. While one could compute NAB at different
points in the past to extrapolate into the future, a better approach
may be to directly incorporate time-series data as input and output
a time-parameterized NAB function.

11. CONCLUSION

In this paper we develop the net acquisition beneﬁt (NAB) met-
ric to approximate proﬁt per impression in order to measure the ef-
fectiveness of an ad campaign, and the incremental net acquisition
beneﬁt (INAB) to measure the marginal beneﬁt of one ad strategy
over another. Using these metrics and extensive search and ad click
data from a major search-ad provider, we ﬁnd that cannibalizing
organic trafﬁc and poaching a competitor’s trafﬁc are frequently
ineffective while call extensions on mobile phones show promise.

89Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.
This work was funded in part by the National Science Foundation
through grant CNS-1237264.
12. REFERENCES
[1] Google Settles With Rosetta Stone Over Trademark

Infringement Within Search And Ads Lawsuit.
http://techcrunch.com/2012/10/31/google-settles-with-
rosetta-stone-over-trademark-infringement-within-search-
and-ads-lawsuit/.

[2] Google:Update to U.S. ad text trademark policy.

http://adwords.blogspot.com/2009/05/update-to-us-ad-text-
trademark-policy.html.

[3] Search Marketing Agency Price Models.

http://searchengineland.com/search-marketing-agency-
pricing-models-11039.

[4] Smartphone user study shows mobile movement under way.
http://googlemobileads.blogspot.com/2011/04/smartphone-
user-study-shows-mobile.html.

[5] What average Ads click through rate (CTR) is good for text
ad? https://www.en.adwords-community.com/t5/Tracking-
Reporting/What-average-Ads-click-through-rate-CTR-is-
good-for-text-ad/td-p/150054.

[6] Will ‘Useless’ Clicks Really Cost Mobile Advertisers $6

Billion+ by 2016?
http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2207164/Will-Useless-
Clicks-Really-Cost-Mobile-Advertisers-6-Billion-by-2016.

[7] Is Google Gobbling Up the Indian Internet Space?

http://forbesindia.com/article/real-issue/is-google-gobbling-
up-the-indian-internet-space/35641/1, July 2013.

[8] M. Babaioff, N. Nisan, and R. Paes Leme. Price Competition
in Online Combinatorial Markets. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on World Wide Web, 2014.
[9] P. Barford, I. Canadi, D. Krushevskaja, Q. Ma, and

S. Muthukrishnan. Adscape: Harvesting and Analyzing
Online Display Ads. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on World Wide Web, 2014.

[10] T. Blake, C. Nosko, and S. Tadelis. Consumer Heterogeneity

and Paid Search Effectiveness: A Large Scale Field
Experiment. NBER Working Paper, pages 1–26, 2013.

[11] L. Blumrosen, J. Hartline, and S. Nong. Position auctions

and non-uniform conversion rates. In ACM EC Workshop on
Advertisement Auctions, 2008.

[12] A. Z. Broder, P. Ciccolo, M. Fontoura, E. Gabrilovich,

V. Josifovski, and L. Riedel. Search Advertising Using Web
Relevance Feedback. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
CIKM ’08, pages 1013–1022, New York, NY, USA, 2008.
ACM.

[13] D. Chan, Y. Yuan, J. Koehler, and D. Kumar. Incremental

Clicks Impact Of Search Advertising. Technical report,
Google, Inc., 2011.

[14] Y. Chen and T. W. Yan. Position-normalized Click Prediction

in Search Advertising. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 2012.

[15] N. Daswani and M. Stoppelman. The Anatomy of

Clickbot.A. In Proceedings of the ﬁrst conference on First
Workshop on Hot Topics in Understanding Botnets, 2007.

[16] V. Dave, S. Guha, and Y. Zhang. Measuring and

Fingerprinting Click-Spam in Ad Networks. SIGCOMM
Comput. Commun. Rev., 42(4):175–186, August 2012.

[17] V. Dave, S. Guha, and Y. Zhang. ViceROI: Catching

Click-spam in Search Ad Networks. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer & Communications
Security, 2013.

[18] M. de Sa, V. Navalpakkam, and E. F. Churchill. Mobile

Advertising: Evaluating the Effects of Animation, User and
Content Relevance. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2013.

[19] A. Deng, T. Li, and Y. Guo. Statistical Inference in

Two-stage Online Controlled Experiments with Treatment
Selection and Validation. In Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on World Wide Web, 2014.
[20] B. Edelman, M. Ostrovsky, and M. Schwarz. Internet

advertising and the generalized second price auction: Selling
billions of dollars worth of keywords. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.

[21] Google. AdWords Help – Measuring return on investment

(ROI).
https://support.google.com/adwords/answer/1722066?hl=en.

[22] T. Graepel, J. Q. Candela, T. Borchert, and R. Herbrich.
Web-Scale Bayesian Click-Through Rate Prediction for
Sponsored Search Advertising in Microsoft’s Bing Search
Engine. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Machine Learning ICML 2010, Invited Applications
Track (unreviewed, to appear), June 2010. Invited
Applications Track.

[23] H. Haddadi. Fighting Online Click-Fraud Using Bluff Ads.

SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 40(2):21–25, Apr. 2010.

[24] D. Hillard, S. Schroedl, E. Manavoglu, H. Raghavan, and

C. Leggetter. Improving Ad Relevance in Sponsored Search.
In Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’10, pages
361–370, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

[25] IAB. Internet advertising revenue report.

http://www.iab.net/media/ﬁle/IAB_Internet_Advertising_
Revenue_Report_FY_2013.pdf.

[26] B. J. Jansen and S. Schuster. BIDDING ON THE BUYING
FUNNEL FOR SPONSORED SEARCH AND KEYWORD
ADVERTISING. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research,
12(1):1–18, 2011.

[27] G. A. Johnson, R. A. Lewis, and D. H. Reiley. Location,

Location, Location: Repetition and Proximity Increase
Advertising Effectiveness. Available at SSRN 2268215, 2014.

[28] A. Juels, S. Stamm, and M. Jakobsson. Combating Click

Fraud via Premium Clicks. In Proceedings of 16th USENIX
Security Symposium on USENIX Security Symposium, 2007.

[29] R. Lewis and D. Reiley. Online Ads and Ofﬂine Sales:

Measuring the Effect of Retail Advertising via a Controlled
Experiment on Yahoo! Quantitative Marketing and
Economics, 12(3):235–266, 2014.

[30] R. A. Lewis and J. M. Rao. On the Near Impossibility of

Measuring the Returns to Advertising. 2013.

[31] R. A. Lewis, J. M. Rao, and D. H. Reiley. Here, There, and

Everywhere: Correlated Online Behaviors Can Lead to
Overestimates of the Effects of Advertising. In Proceedings
of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW ’11, pages 157–166, New York, NY, USA, 2011.
ACM.

[32] S. Lysen. Incremental Clicks Impact of Mobile Search

Advertising. Technical report, Google, Inc., 2013.

90[33] A. Metwally, D. Agrawal, and A. El Abbadi. DETECTIVES:

DETEcting Coalition hiT Inﬂation attacks in adVertising
nEtworks Streams. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’07, pages 241–250,
New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.

[34] A. Metwally, F. Emekçi, D. Agrawal, and A. El Abbadi.

SLEUTH: Single-pubLisher attack dEtection Using
correlaTion Hunting. PVLDB, 1(2):1217–1228, Aug. 2008.

[35] B. Miller, P. Pearce, C. Grier, C. Kreibich, and V. Paxson.

What’s Clicking What? Techniques and Innovations of
Today’s Clickbots. DIMVA, pages 164–183, 2011.
[36] B. Rey and A. Kannan. Conversion Rate Based Bid

Adjustment for Sponsored Search. In Proceedings of the
19th International Conference on World Wide Web, 2010.
[37] M. Richardson, E. Dominowska, and R. Ragno. Predicting
Clicks: Estimating the Click-through Rate for New Ads. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World
Wide Web, 2007.

[38] D. Sculley, R. G. Malkin, S. Basu, and R. J. Bayardo.

Predicting Bounce Rates in Sponsored Search
Advertisements. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, KDD ’09, pages 1325–1334, New York, NY, USA,
2009. ACM.

[39] V. Shankar and S. Balasubramanian. Mobile Marketing: A
Synthesis and Prognosis. Journal of Interactive Marketing,
23(2):118 – 129, 2009. Anniversary Issue.

[40] E. Sodomka, S. Lahaie, and D. Hillard. A Predictive Model

for Advertiser Value-Per-Click in Sponsored Search. In
Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World
Wide Web, 2013.

[41] Y. Song, H. Ma, H. Wang, and K. Wang. Exploring and
Exploiting User Search Behavior on Mobile and Tablet
Devices to Improve Search Relevance. In Proceedings of the
22Nd International Conference on World Wide Web, 2013.
[42] K. Springborn and P. Barford. Impression Fraud in Online
Advertising via Pay-per-view Networks. In Proceedings of
the 22Nd USENIX Conference on Security, 2013.

[43] A. A. Stinnett and J. Mullahy. Net health beneﬁts a new

framework for the analysis of uncertainty in
cost-effectiveness analysis. Medical Decision Making,
18(2):S68–S80, 1998.

[44] S. Yang and A. Ghose. Analyzing the Relationship Between

Organic and Sponsored Search Advertising: Positive,
Negative, or Zero Interdependence? Marketing Science,
29(4):602–623, 2010.

91