Condensing Steam:

Distilling the Diversity of Gamer Behavior

Mark O’Neill, Elham Vaziripour, Justin Wu, Daniel Zappala

mto@byu.edu, elhamvaziripour@byu.edu, justinwu@byu.edu, zappala@cs.byu.edu

Department of Computer Science

Brigham Young University

ABSTRACT
We present a comprehensive measurement study of the
Steam gaming network, the ﬁrst complete examination
of any major gaming network, comprising all 108.7 mil-
lion user accounts and 384.3 million owned games. We
examine gamer behavior across the dimensions of social
connectivity, playtime, game ownership, genre aﬃnity,
and monetary expenditure. As a whole, gamer behav-
ior is highly diverse and characterized by heavy-tailed
distributions. Most players exhibit modest behaviors
in terms of the number of minutes played per day and
the amount of money spent on games, though there is
a long tail with outliers, such as gamers who maximize
achievements or playtime stats, or gamers who collect
games they don’t play. We ﬁnd some strong correlations
that show that players tend to befriend those who are
similar in terms of popularity, playtime, money spent,
and games owned. We collect a second snapshot of the
Steam network and show that our ﬁndings are robust
across both measurements. We conclude by relating
these ﬁndings to other relevant studies, including gamer
stereotypes, game addiction, and social networking.

1.

INTRODUCTION

It is estimated that nearly 60 percent of Americans
play video games1, bringing in annual revenue of over
$25 billion for PC gaming alone2. There is a notable
body of academic work focused on characterizing the
gamers that make up this market, examining factors such

1http://www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/ESA EF 2014.pdf/
2http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2014-01-28-pc-
gaming-market-to-exceed-USD25-billion-this-year-dfc/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
IMC 2016, November 14 - 16, 2016, Santa Monica, CA, USA
c(cid:13) 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4526-2/16/11. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2987443.2987489

as age, gender, and economic status [24, 11, 8]. That
notwithstanding, the sheer size of this demographic has
made comprehensive study of gamer behavior a diﬃcult
obstacle to tackle.

Research seeking to understand gamer behavior em-
ploys a variety of methods, including surveys, interviews,
and large-scale data analysis. Surveys and interviews
have the advantages of being able to discern motives and
weigh demographic factors, such as gender or income
[26, 25]. Data analysis complements this work by en-
abling researchers to accurately and directly characterize
players’ gaming behaviors based on statistics such as
the amount of time spent playing. This is of particu-
lar value since data drawn from surveys can be skewed
by participants who mischaracterize their behavior [10].
Moreover, the large datasets now available due to the
online nature of game distribution and play allow us to
study the behavior of millions of players at once, a scale
that is simply not possible with surveys and interviews.
In this paper, we supplement earlier work performed
on smaller scales [2, 3] by analyzing the gaming behav-
ior of over 100 million users in the ﬁrst comprehensive
measurement of the Steam gaming network. Steam is
one of the largest gaming networks in the world, and
since our measurements has grown to 125 million active
users at the time of publication.3

Steam provides a unique opportunity for analysis in
several ways. First, because Steam is a platform for
game distribution, our ﬁndings cover a broad spectrum
of gamers. Previous measurements have often focused
on a single game, such as World of Warcraft, Everquest,
or Halo [24, 10, 6, 16]. Second, because Steam oﬀers an
open API for their platform, we are able to collect an
exhaustive measurement of all users and games. Our
measurements cover 108.7 million user accounts, 196.4
million friendships, 3.0 million groups, 384.3 million
owned games, and a collective 1.11 million years of play-
time. The comprehensive nature of this data enables us
to accurately characterize the distributions of a variety
of gamer behaviors across the entire Steam user base, by-
passing potential sampling issues that may have skewed

3https://www.vg247.com/2015/02/24/steam-has-over-125-
million-active-users-8-9m-concurrent-peak/

81previous results. Steam provides data on friendships,
game ownership, and playtime data, but not access to
more detailed game statistics. We thus necessarily fo-
cus on a general characterization of aggregate behaviors
among Steam users, as opposed to an in-depth study
of speciﬁc behaviors. However, even at this broad level
we are able to better understand numerous aspects of
gamer behavior.

So what are gamers really like? Using this dataset, we
investigate questions concerning gamer behavior, such
as how many friends they have, what kinds of groups
they join, how much gamers play, what types of games
they play, and how much money they spend. Our study
indicates that as a whole gamer behavior is highly di-
verse and characterized by heavy-tailed distributions,
meaning gamers are not easily characterized by sum-
mary statistics such as means. A variety of interesting
behaviors manifest when examining this data in detail.
In particular, our most salient ﬁndings are as follows:
• The number of friendships is low relative to other
social networks, but most of the playtime is spent
on multiplayer games.

• Most players exhibit modest behaviors in terms
of the number of minutes played per day, and the
amount of money spent on games. The 90th per-
centile for two-week playtime is 8.9 hours, the 90th
percentile for games owned is 21, and the 90th per-
centile for lifetime market value is $317.64. Because
these are 90th percentiles, the majority of users ex-
hibit behaviors far below these values, which runs
counter to stereotypes about gamers [12].

• There is a long tail of behaviors in all distribu-
tions, caused by a variety of diﬀerent motivations.
Some gamers focus on maximizing playtime stats or
achievements, and others collect games they don’t
play.

• We ﬁnd some strong correlations that show that
players tend to befriend those who are similar in
terms of popularity, playtime, money spent, and
games owned.

• We demonstrate that playtime varies signiﬁcantly
over the course of a week for individual players;
their playtime is not consistent from day to day.
• We examine achievements and ﬁnd that there is a
moderate correlation between how much a game
is played and how many achievements it oﬀers,
and that players tend to get more achievements in
adventure games.

• We collect a second snapshot of the Steam network
and demonstrate that our ﬁndings are robust across
both measurements. Despite large increases in
game ownership (and money) in the heavy tail
of the second study, the 80th percentile for these
distributions doesn’t increase nearly as much.

We conclude by relating these ﬁndings to other rele-
vant studies, including gamer stereotypes, game addic-
tion, and social networking. The large dataset we have
collected frames the discussion of gamers as a diverse
group and opens the door to study individual behaviors
in more detail.
2. BACKGROUND

The Steam digital distribution service was started
in 2003 and is owned and operated by the Valve Cor-
poration, a video game developer. In this section we
describe the Steam platform and related work that has
used Steam to measure gamers.
2.1 The Steam Platform

Users of the service interact with it via a local client,
available for Windows, Mac, and Linux. From the Steam
client, gamers can download and launch games that have
been associated with their accounts by purchase through
Steam. After launch, the Steam client continues to
run alongside the current game, providing access to in-
stant messaging with friends, achievement notiﬁcations,
game walkthroughs, and other features with an easily-
accessible overlay.

The Steam catalog, as of May 2014, included titles
from some 1,201 publishers, has attained an estimated
75% market share of PC video game sales4, and as of that
time had achieved a peak of 7.8 million concurrent users.5
Valve reported over 75 million active Steam users6, and
we found 108.7 million total registered accounts at the
time of our data collection.

In addition to its digital store, Steam provides nu-
merous social networking features such as proﬁle pages,
friends, groups, instant messaging, voice chat, and news
feeds. Steam also provides some social networking fea-
tures speciﬁc to its gaming emphasis such as screenshot
and video sharing, game achievement showcases, leader-
board statistics, and more. Each group on Steam has an
event calendar, a group chat room, and a group message
board to allow their members to better communicate
and organize. A user’s proﬁle provides an overview of
a user’s social and gaming statistics. Additionally, the
user’s list of friends, joined groups, games owned, and
recently played games are presented.

In addition, each user has a “Steam level” that is
prominently displayed along with “badges” that denote
various achievements on Steam. Badges increase a user’s
Steam level, which in turn unlocks additional widgets
for users to enhance their proﬁles and increases the max-
imum number of friends they can have. Most badges are
awarded by collecting complete sets of virtual trading
cards, which can be obtained by playing correspond-
ing games and trading with other users on the network.
4http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-11-04/valve-lines-
up-console-partners-in-challenge-to-microsoft-sony.html/
5http://store.steampowered.com/stats/
6http://www.joystiq.com/2014/01/15/steam-has-75-
million-active-users-valve-announces-at-dev-days/

82Rank Country

Percent

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

United States
Russia
Germany
Britain
France
Brazil
Canada
Poland
Australia
Sweden

20.21%
10.18%
7.56%
5.22%
5.19%
3.95%
3.81%
3.20%
2.90%
2.34%

Other (226)

35.44%

Table 1: Breakdown of users’ reported country. Shown
for only the 10.7% of users that self-report a country of
residence.

Smaller numbers of badges are awarded for participat-
ing in Steam community events and obtaining game
collections of landmark sizes.

Steam users may opt to self-report a country of resi-
dence through their proﬁles. The distribution of coun-
tries for the 10.7% of users that have opted to do so
is shown in Table 1. Prominent Western nations tend
to have the most presence on Steam, but overall, users
report to be from 236 distinct countries.
2.2 Measuring Steam

The Steam platform oﬀers a unique opportunity to
measure gamers at scale, due to its popularity and its
open API. Though our work is the ﬁrst to use the API
directly, two prior studies have been conducted using
partial data from the Steam network that is collected
via a web crawler.

Becker et al. used a crawler to collect data on 9 million
users (out of 30 million at the time), 82.2 million friend-
ships, 1.98 million groups, and 1,824 games [2]. Becker
primarily studied the structure of the gaming network,
as deﬁned by friendships among users, and found evi-
dence of several small world graph characteristics. He
also showed that the growth of users is exponential and
the growth in degree distribution is linear over the period
studied.

Blackburn et al. crawled the Steam Community web
site to collect data on 12 million users (again out of 30
million), 88.5 million friendships, and 1.5 million groups
[3]. Blackburn’s focus was not on gamer behavior, but
rather focused primarily on cheater behavior, ﬁnding
that cheaters are not distinguished by their network
characteristics.

Our data set and analysis are distinguished from these
previous studies in both magnitude and focus. The ex-
haustive collection of data allows us to assess characteris-
tics of gamer behavior at scale and with high conﬁdence.
For example, when previous studies collect a sample of
Steam users with a crawl of the network, the data is

biased since users with fewer friends are less likely to be
crawled. Our results corroborate Becker’s analysis of the
evolution of the friend network, but their results were
limited to a crawl of the large, connected component
of the Steam network. As such, the scale of our results
diﬀer although the general behavior is similar. Moreover,
our focus extends beyond a study of the social structure
of the network to further analyze a wide variety of gamer
behaviors.

3. METHODOLOGY

In this section we describe how we collect a full list
of all the users, friendships, and games from the Steam
system. We also explain how we validate and analyze
the data.
3.1 Data Collection

Valve Corporation, the company that owns and op-
erates Steam, provides a REST API, called the Steam
Web API 7, for gathering information about users’ pro-
ﬁles, friendships, game ownerships and playtimes, group
memberships, and more. We use this API to crawl 108.7
million Steam accounts, along with the friendship list,
games owned, play times, and group memberships cor-
responding to each account. Our dataset comprises all
Steam accounts available at the time of collection. We
also obtained information on 6,156 products available
on Steam using the Steam desktop client.

While collecting data we acted within the terms and
conditions of the public API and were careful to avoid
negatively impacting the Steam service. To reduce strain
on the Steam infrastructure, we limited our calls to the
API to be roughly 85% of the maximum allowed by the
API’s terms of service. We did not collect any personally
identiﬁable information and were limited only to data
that Valve makes public regarding user accounts and
games. We communicated with Valve regarding this
work and provided them with drafts of our ﬁndings.

When a user registers with the Steam network, they
are assigned a unique ID known as a Steam ID. Steam
IDs have both 32-bit (e.g. STEAM 0:1:849986) and
64-bit representations (e.g. 76561197961965701), with
a bijection between the two forms. These 64-bit Steam
IDs are assigned in a sequential manner, beginning with
a speciﬁed base value (76561197960265728). Dedicated
game servers and game clients tend to use the 32-bit
forms of Steam IDs, perhaps for legacy reasons. The
Steam APIs and community web pages, however, use the
64-bit versions of Steam IDs, and we correspondingly
deal exclusively with this representation in our study.

To obtain user account information, we exhaustively
queried the Steam API for proﬁle data for the entire
population of Steam users, starting from the base ID
and continuing until the API returned Steam accounts
created just seconds before the moment of collection.We

7Steam Web API documentation, accessed 9 Nov 2014, http:
//steamcommunity.com/dev

83crawled the ID space from February 28th, 2013 through
March 18th, 2013, ﬁnding a total of 108.7 million user
accounts as of the ending date of our crawl. This phase
of data collection progressed relatively quickly because
the corresponding API endpoint allowed us to collect up
to 100 user proﬁles at once. Not all queried Steam IDs
are associated with a valid Steam account, creating a
variation of valid Steam account density in the queried
ID space. Density was often below 50% in the beginning
of the range until about 21.5% through, after which point
density was consistently above 90%. We hypothesize
that the non-uniform distribution of Steam accounts
across the ID range is a consequence of changes in how
IDs were assigned, deletion of old accounts, or both.

We consider all account IDs that are linked to ac-
count proﬁles to be valid Steam IDs. Using this list of
valid Steam IDs, we made additional API requests for
the friendships, game ownerships and playtimes, and
group memberships corresponding to each user. This
process required many more API calls than proﬁle col-
lection, because each query could only return data for
a single Steam account at a time. Due to the vastly
increased number of calls made to the API, in conjunc-
tion with API rate limits, this second data collection
phase spanned several months, from May 5th, 2013 to
November 5th, 2013.

In addition to user data, we also obtained information
about the various products available on Steam. Such
data is not available via the Steam Web API, but appears
in the storefront of the Steam client itself. We analyzed
the network traﬃc generated by the Steam client in
its “Big Picture Mode” as it requested game data, and
then emulated these requests for every product in the
Steam catalog using each product’s corresponding “App
ID.” The full list of App IDs used in these queries was
obtained via an unpublicized endpoint of the Steam
REST API. This data was collected on April 9th, 2014.
Though the amount of data retrieved by these ﬁnal
queries was small, collection was performed over the span
of several hours as we opted to rate-limit our queries to
one every two seconds. The information collected during
this ﬁnal phase of collection included the associated
genre(s), type (e.g. game, trailer, demo), developer
name, current price, Metacritic rating, release date, and
other such information corresponding to every product
currently available on Steam.

Note that the data Valve provides do not include
detailed play data for movement or actions in a game.
For example, we can’t tell whether two friends play
the same game at the same time, or what kinds of
interactions they have with a game. Rather, the data
provided aﬀords a high level view of overall user behavior
regarding friendships, games owned, time and money
spent playing games, achievements reached, and the
correlations among these variables.

Our full datasest, including all source data mentioned
in this work, is available at steam.internet.byu.edu.

3.2 Data Validation

All of the data collected concerning user accounts is
publicly accessible from player proﬁles, through both
the Steam website and client, which provides some av-
enues for further investigation and validation. We spent
nearly a week extensively sampling our data manually
to assure that accounts were associated with real users,
both by randomly sampling hundreds of accounts and
also by examining all accounts that exhibited extreme
behaviors. To ensure that our data represented real
players, we examined their name, friends, and posts on
their public proﬁle. A small number of accounts are
marked by Valve to indicate whether they belong to
Valve employees or developers, but even these are used
as personal accounts to play games and marked only for
cosmetic reasons. In cases where we observe anomalous
behaviors (such as owning large numbers of games and
not playing any of them), we manually checked all such
accounts and conﬁrmed that these appear to be real
people who have diﬀerent motivations from a typical
player (e.g. collecting instead of playing), rather than
test accounts.

3.3 Data Analysis

One contribution of our work demonstrates that the
Steam social network and various gaming behaviors are
characterized by heavy-tailed distributions. Some previ-
ous work measuring social networks have claimed net-
works follow power-law distributions, without properly
distinguishing between types of heavy-tailed distribu-
tions [4, 18]. Properly identifying the precise nature of
these distributions plays an important role in modeling
because this provides important clues about the under-
lying generative mechanisms involved. Here we brieﬂy
describe the distributions mentioned in the paper as well
as the technique employed in classifying our data as one
of these distributions.

Heavy-tailed distributions are a class of probability
distributions whose tails are not exponentially bounded.
These distributions are of particular interest because
they describe behaviors wherein the probability of ob-
serving an extreme event is more likely than would be
suggested by a Gaussian (normal) distribution. As might
be expected, however, not all distributions classiﬁed as
“heavy-tailed” describe identical behaviors. Instead, they
are further broken down by the speciﬁc likelihoods of
these extreme events into broader classes such as long-
and fat-tailed distributions as well as speciﬁc distribu-
tions such as power-laws and lognormal distributions.

As all the distributions described in this work are
heavy-tailed distributions, we utilized the powerlaw 1.3
package [1] - a Python tool designed to classify empirical,
heavy-tailed data - to identify with greater speciﬁcity
the precise nature of these distributions. This tool syn-
thesizes the various types of heavy-tailed distributions
and performs a goodness-of-ﬁt test, the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov statistic, against the empirical data, providing

84Figure 1: Evolution of Steam friendship graph. The
number of users and the number of friendships shows a
steady increase since 2008.

Figure 2: Evolution of Steam friend degree distribution.
There is a long-tailed distribution of friendships per use,
both each year and for the entire network.

a likelihood ratio that the data ﬁts the given distribution
type, a methodology described by Clauset et al. in [4].
Within this paper, we label the distributions captured
in our data as one of the following types: heavy-tailed,
long-tailed, lognormal, and truncated power law distri-
butions (we do not observe any true power law distribu-
tions). Throughout the body of this work, we label the
discussed distributions in accordance with the greatest
speciﬁcity we are able to assign with conﬁdence.
In
particular, we label a distribution as heavy-tailed when
it passes the power law vs. exponential distribution test,
but cannot with any degree of certainty clarify the label
further than that. The label of long-tailed distribution
is assigned to distributions that we were able to narrow
to being either a lognormal or a truncated power law
distribution, but for which the statistical comparison is
unable to classify between the two. The detailed param-
eters for the ﬁtting process and statistical tests, as well
as the classiﬁcations for each distribution, are found in
the Appendix.

4. SOCIAL STRUCTURE

Steam provides its users with the ability to establish
social links with other users through friend relation-
ships and group aﬃliations. In total, we ﬁnd 196.37
million bidirectional friendships and 81.30 million group
memberships on Steam.
4.1 Friendships

We study the graph of Steam friendships, made by
considering each user to be a node and each friendship to
be a link. Friendships in Steam are reciprocal, and thus
modeled here as bidirectional links. Figure 1 shows the
evolution of the Steam friendship graph since friendship
timestamps were ﬁrst recorded in September of 2008 un-
til the time of our data collection. Note, the graph does

not include friendships established from 2003 to 2008, so
it does not reach the total 196.4 million friendships we
collected. This graph reveals a steady increase of Steam
users since 2008 as well as that friendships form at a
faster rate than users join the network (demonstrated
by the steeper, increasing slope of the latter curve).

To understand the connectivity of gamers in the Steam
friend graph, we plot the distribution of the number of
friends users have in Figure 2. Both yearly breakdowns
and a distribution representing the full network to-date
are provided. All years exhibit a long-tailed distribution
of friendships per user: on average, 9 million gamers
(88.06%) add ten or less friends per year and only 2,500
gamers (0.02%) add more than two hundred friends per
year. The shape of each year’s curve is very similar
despite the steadily increasing size of Steam’s user base
over the years, indicating that overall gamer friendship
behavior is independent of the size of the network.

We also observe two deviations from the otherwise
smooth nature of the distribution for the entire network.
The ﬁrst occurs at a position corresponding to 250 friends
and the second at a position corresponding to 300 friends.
The number of users with friend counts above 250 are
much less than expected given the prior part of the curve.
Both of these are due to the default limitations placed
on friend counts. Without special action, users may not
have more than 250 friends. This limit is raised to 300
if a user links her Steam account with her Facebook
account. Steam also oﬀers ﬁve additional “friend slots”
as a reward for each “level” obtained by a user in a
meta-game involving virtual trading cards acquired by
playing games and trading with other users. These
hurdles account for the lower-than-expected number of
people with friend counts above 250.

Since these distributions are long-tailed, rather than
normal, the mean does not describe a “typical” user

85Group Type

Count Percent

Game Server
Single Game
Gaming Community
Special Interest
Steam
Publisher

Total

114
51
43
35
4
3

250

45.6%
20.4%
17.2%
14.0%
1.6%
1.2%

100.0%

Table 2: Breakdown of 250 largest groups by type. Game
server groups comprise the largest portion.

or behavior. For example, in the entire network, the
average number of friends a user has is four, but only
1.85% of Steam users have four friends. However, with
the full distribution visible, we can clearly see that the
overwhelming majority of gamers have a few friends,
and an increasingly smaller amount have larger numbers
of friends. Such distributions are common throughout
our results. We will repeatedly see that more modest
measures of behavior describe the overwhelming majority
of gamers while vast ranges of more extreme behavior
can be attributed to a small minority.

As previously described, Steam proﬁles also allow their
owners to report their location, with 10.7% and 4.0%
of users reporting their country and city of residence,
respectively. Using these values we explore the extent to
which physical locality exists in users’ friend lists. We
ﬁnd that 30.34% of friendships between users who both
declare a country location are international. We ﬁnd
also that, for users who report a city, friends in 79.84%
of friendships come from diﬀerent cities. We thus see
that gamers form friendships with more people outside
their neighborhoods than inside.
4.2 Groups

Plotting groups by their membership counts reveals
that group size distribution is heavy-tailed while the
number of groups users join follows a long-tailed pattern.
Likewise, plotting users by the number of groups they
belong to reveals another heavy-tailed distribution, with
a substantial amount of users belonging to just one or
no group and a long tail of some users belonging to a
large number of groups.

Unfortunately, Steam does not currently oﬀer a stan-
dard way for a group to identify its nature to viewers.
However, we manually investigated the pages of the
top 250 largest groups and categorized each into one of
six categories: “Single Game”, “Game Server”, “Gam-
ing Community”, “Publisher”, “Special Interest”, and
“Steam”. Single Game groups are those created for fans
of an individual game. Game Server groups are those
that host dedicated servers for one or more distinct
games. Gaming Community groups focus on community
identity and play multiple games. If a Gaming Com-
munity group also hosts dedicated servers it is labeled

Figure 3: Distribution of the number of distinct games
played by members of a group. Shows only groups with
more than 100 members. Many groups play hundreds
of games.

as a Game Server group. Publisher groups are formed
for fans of a particular game publisher. Special Interest
groups are those created for fans of topics unrelated to
speciﬁc games (e.g. trading, activism, beer). Finally,
Steam groups are oﬃcial groups created by Valve for
updates concerning Steam features.

The breakdown of the types of the top 250 most
populous Steam groups is provided in Table 2. Game
Server groups account for the largest portion of the
top 250 groups, followed by Single Game and Gaming
Community groups.

The popularity of groups centered on games prompts
the question of what number of distinct games are played
by the members of a single group. The answer to this
question is depicted in Figure 3, which shows the number
of groups distributed by the number of distinct games
played by their members. We consider only large groups
with 100 members or more, constraining the number
of groups to 58,986. Small numbers of distinct games
played by group members indicate a very focused group.
Large numbers of distinct played games indicate groups
with less emphasis on speciﬁc games.

We ﬁnd that a relatively small number of groups have
memberships that are dedicated to very small sets of
games. Further investigation reveals that only 2,933 of
these groups (4.97%) have members who dedicate 90%-
100% of their playtime to a single game. We ﬁnd that
large amounts of groups have members with playtime
for larger numbers of games (game counts of 100 - 1000).
However, as the number of distinct games continues to
increase the number of corresponding groups decreases.
This decline occurs because most users who own games
(89.78%) own less than 20 games, making large numbers
of distinct games across the group a rarity.

86propensity of normal Steam users to acquire unplayed
games as previously described. These are users who
acquire many games but never play most of them. As
far as we have been able to tell through our investigations
of this issue, this is not done as a ﬁnancial investment
because Steam does not allow users to trade or resell
games that have already been redeemed into a user’s
game library. Furthermore, as a platform for digital
distribution, there are no limits on the number of copies
of a game sold with the exception of games that have
been discontinued (which users are unable to forecast).
Instead, users seemingly do this for social prestige or
vanity, e.g., there are invite-only Steam groups whose
membership is predicated upon a user owning at least a
certain number of games.

As an example, our queries found 29 users with game
libraries of at least 500 games who had never played a
single one. The user with the largest game collection in
our dataset owned 90.3% of the games currently available
in the Steam store at the time we retrieved his data.
This same user, however, had only accumulated playtime
on 34.5% of those games in his collection8. This desire to
“collect” is further reinforced by proﬁle badge awards that
directly correspond to game collection. Circumstantial
evidence conﬁrms that some users do prefer to collect –
on forums users brag about their game ownership, others
trade virtual commodities for game copies, and there
are online leaderboards boasting account value. One
user is well known for collecting spare copies of Barbie
Dreamhouse Party, owning hundreds of copies of it.

We also investigate the genre dimension of game own-
ership. Steam assigns one or more genre labels to each
game it oﬀers. Most genre labels describe the principal
gameplay mechanics innate to a game such as “Action”
and “Strategy.” There are, however, some exceptions:
“Free to Play” indicates that a game is free, but is likely
to have in-game “microtransaction” oﬀers for additional
features and “Indie” indicates that the title has been
developed or published by a small, independent ﬁrm.

Figure 5 shows the ownership of games on Steam
broken down by genre. The lighter bars represent the
total number of games of that genre owned across all
Steam accounts. The darker bars (the bottom segments)
show how many of those games that are owned have
not been played. The “Action” genre is by far the most
popular in terms of ownership, followed distantly by the
“Strategy” and “Indie” genres. Action games comprise
38.1% of Steam’s current catalog. Secondly, we also note
a large number of unplayed games in user’s libraries.
41.49% of Action games, for example, are unplayed. We
also see large percentages of unplayed games for all other
genres (28.86% for Strategy, 32.3% for Indie, 24.26%
for RPG, etc.). This further illustrates the gap seen in
Figure 4 between played and unplayed games and shows
that this behavior seems to be genre-agnostic.

8As discussed in Section 3.2, we did manually conﬁrm that
this was a real player.

Figure 4: Distribution of game ownership. The 80th
percentile is 10 games owned and 7 games played.

5. GAME OWNERSHIP

Figure 4 shows the long-tailed distribution of game
ownership on Steam, including all games in a user’s
library as well as only those that have been played
at some point. To put this data into perspective, we
show also the 80th percentile values for these two types
alongside the distributions as vertical lines. This means
that 80% of Steam users who own at least one game
fall to the left of the vertical lines on the graph. The
relative placement of these values on the graph, of 10
and 7 games respectively, clearly demonstrates the sheer
length and span of the heavy tail.

Two additional points are of note in Figure 4: the
uptick of owners who own between 1268 and 1290 games
(note also a similar uptick between $14,710 and $15,250
in Figure 8), as well as the distance between the two
depicted distributions. We believe that this phenomenon
can be attributed to both the tendency of players at
large to acquire games they do not play as well as a
speciﬁc “collector” subset of the Steam population for
whom the acquisition of games is a goal in and of itself.
The existence of unplayed games within the library of
a typical user can be explained in two ways. The ﬁrst is
the prevalence of game bundles sold on Steam (publisher
collections, series packs, Humble Bundle [9] oﬀers, etc.).
One might purchase a bundle of games desiring only a
single game in the bundle, and thus never play the rest.
Additionally, there are limitations on time and energy;
one only has so much free time, and the larger one’s
game collection, the more diﬃcult it becomes to try
them all, regardless of intent. For example, one author
has only played 58% of the games associated with his
account due to these reasons.

The other contributing factor to the eﬀects illustrated
in Figure 4 is the behavior of a speciﬁc set of Steam
users we label as collectors, and is disparate from the

87Figure 5: Game ownership by genre. Light bars represent
total copies owned, and dark bars represent owned but
unplayed games. The top-down ordering of the legend
corresponds to a left-right order of genres. The Action
genre is by far the most popular in terms of ownership.
There is a signiﬁcant gap between owned but unplayed
games and played games.

6. TIME AND MONEY

Given the numerous studies on game addiction [13],
the resource expenditure devoted to this activity is of
particular interest. The Steam API provides an oppor-
tunity to answer the questions of how much time and
money is spent gaming.

For each game in a Steam user’s library, playtime is
directly recorded in two ways: the total playtime for
that game since it was added to the user’s library, and
a rolling playtime value spanning the two weeks leading
up to the moment the query was issued. These values
are recorded at the granularity of a minute. Games
generally cannot be played without recording this data
– games must be run via the Steam client and even if
disconnected from the Internet the data is reported after
reconnection.

The precise amount of money spent by users on the
games in their library is not directly revealed through the
API. Despite this limitation, we provide an approxima-
tion of money spent by calculating the market value of
each user’s account using the 2014 price of Steam games
as shown on the Steam storefront. We assume an aver-
aging eﬀect in the current prices of games in the Steam
store. While many games are purchased on sale, there
are also permanent price reductions for games that are
not listed as discounts; both are reﬂected in the current
market value approximation that we use. Thus, while
there are occurrences where our estimates are likely too
high, because a game in a player’s library was purchased
on sale, there will similarly be occurrences where our
estimate is too low, because a game was purchased prior

Figure 6: CDF of total and two-week playtime. The
top 20% of Steam users account for 82.4% of the total
playtime of all games played on Steam.

to a price reduction. Given that there is no way to get
accurate pricing information without receipt information
that Steam keeps private, this approximation method
is, to our knowledge, no worse than any other.

Using these methods across the entire population of
Steam users, we ﬁnd a cumulative 1.11 million years of
playtime as well as a market value of $5,326,471,034.78
of Steam games.
6.1 Resource Expenditure Across the Pop-

ulation

Figure 6 portrays the distribution of the cumulative
values of total and two-week playtime across the entirety
of Steam. The proximity of the two curves to the x-axis
again demonstrates the unevenness of behavior between
the vast majority of Steam users and their more extreme
counterparts. For reference, the top 20% of Steam users
account for 82.4% of the total playtime of all games
played on Steam. This number parallels the well-known
“80-20 rule” or Pareto principle, used frequently to de-
scribe heavy-tailed behavior. Similar behavior is seen
in YouTube, where one measurement indicates the top
20% of users contribute 72.5% of the videos [5]. The
two-week playtime data reveals that the top 10% of
gamers contribute 93.0% of two-week playtime totals.

As stated earlier, the two-week playtime statistics are
reported in rolling, two-week windows leading up to the
time of the query. It is worth noting that as the phase of
our data collection process which included these values
spanned a period of several months, it is fairly likely
that the reported numbers are representative of “normal”
playing habits, i.e. these values actually represent a
variety of distinct two-week periods falling within that
time span.

As can be seen in Figure 6, over 80% of Steam gamers
had not played any of their games at all in the two weeks

88Figure 7: Distribution of non-zero, two-week playtimes.
The 80th percentile is 32.05 hours, or about 16 hours a
week on average.

Figure 8: Distribution of account market values across
Steam. The 80th percentile is a value of $150.88.

prior to our requesting their gaming data. Thus, not
only are playing habits observed during a small window
of time not representative across the population as a
whole, for more than 80% of Steam gamers, they may
not even be representative of the amount of time that
particular user plays generally.

Figure 7 shows the distribution of two-week playtime
when these Steam users are removed from the graph,
i.e. when only non-zero two-week playtimes are shown.
This illustrates the playtime trends of the 20% of Steam
users who did play during their two-week period. To
give a sense of the scale of the length of the tail shown
here, the 80th percentile value - of 32.05 hours, or just
over 16 hours a week on average - is also plotted. Note
also that this 80th percentile value of non-zero two-week
playtimes corresponds to the 95th percentile of overall
two-week playtimes.

The very end of the tail reaches the maximum possible
value of 336 hours, or the total number of hours in two
weeks. We do not mean to suggest that there are players
who spend literally every second of every day playing
games. The Steam client tracks playtime for as long as
a game is left open, and not necessarily for the amount
of time a user may be active in said game. As such,
users who leave their game open will contribute to these
recorded values. Some players may be purposely racking
up high playtime statistics as a bragging right, since
the most recent two-week value appears in a player’s
proﬁle. Our experience with Steam leads us to believe
this practice is not common and does not aﬀect the bulk
of our playtime results, since this can consume substan-
tial system resources and does not lead to signiﬁcant
beneﬁts. However, there are indeed some users who
have extreme playtimes on the order of 80-90% of the
maximum two-week playtime. These values constitute a
very minor portion of our data (0.01% of users), so we

note these caveats and leave further exploration of this
behavior to future work.

The monetary analogue of our playtime graphs can
be found in Figure 8, which displays the distribution
of the current account market value of Steam users’
game libraries. The anomaly in the graph is likely due
to game collectors, as discussed with Figure 4. Again
demonstrating the extreme nature of values in the tail,
the 80th percentile value, which appears in the graph
to be nearly zero, actually carries a value of $150.88.
Consider, furthermore, that the single largest current
account value ($24,315.40) is over 160 times larger than
this 80th percentile number. Additionally, though not
displayed in this ﬁgure, we note that “80-20 rule” be-
havior is again present: the top 20% of Steam users
account for 73% of the total current market value of
owned games on Steam.

In short, the vast majority of Steam gamers behave
drastically diﬀerently from a select few who both play
and spend orders of magnitude more than their peers.
6.2 Resource Expenditure by Game Type
Figure 9 details the breakdown per-genre of both play-
time and account market values on Steam (foreground
bars represent playtime and background bars represent
account market value). As games can fall within multiple
genres, there exists a certain degree of overlap between
the values displayed, though values can still be directly
compared against the total number of games owned by
Steam users. Perhaps the most interesting data point
with respect to resource expenditure per-genre concerns
the action genre. The action genre constitutes 49.24%
of total playtime on Steam as well as 51.88% of the to-
tal current market value of Steam users’ game libraries.
Although it must be said that Steam users do own more
action games than other genres on Steam, as depicted in
Figure 5, it must also be noted that these numbers are
still over-representative, as only 38.3% of oﬀered Steam

89Figure 9: Cumulative playtime by genre. Foreground
bars correspond to left axis, background bars correspond
to right axis. The top-down ordering of legend corre-
sponds to a left-right order of genres. The Action genre
is the most popular.

Figure 10: Distribution of multiplayer game playtime.
67.7% of two-week playtimes as well as 57.7% of total
playtimes are devoted entirely to playing multiplayer
games.

games fall within this genre (at the time these data were
collected).

Figure 10 depicts the ratio of playtime on Steam de-
voted to single or multiplayer games. 67.7% of two-week
playtimes as well as 57.7% of total playtimes are de-
voted entirely to playing multiplayer games, despite the
fact that only 48.7% of games on Steam are multiplayer
games (i.e. have a multiplayer component). We hypoth-
esize that this over-representation is due to the tendency
of single player-only games to present players with a very
limited set of original gameplay options. This places
limits on their replayability, and thus an upper limit on
the amount of time a player may spend on them. In con-
trast, the natural dynamics of multiplayer features often
allow sustained, original experiences with other persons
and incentivize more time investment via competitive
elements.

7. CORRELATIONS AND HOMOPHILY
One interesting area to explore is whether there are
correlations between diﬀerent aspects of gamer behavior.
Do players who own more games tend to play more often
or have more friends? Do players with more friends play
more often?

We examine plots of correlations to see general trends
and use Spearman’s rank correlation to determine the
signiﬁcance of the correlation. Spearman’s ρ varies from
-1 (inversely correlated) to 1 (positively correlated). One
interpretation of the absolute value of ρ is that from 0
to 0.19 the correlation is “very weak”, 0.20 to 0.39 is
“weak”, 0.40 to 0.59 is “moderate”, 0.60 to 0.79 is “strong”
and 0.80 to 1.0 is “very strong”.

We ﬁnd only a weak correlation between the number
of games owned and the number of friends a player has

(ρ=0.34), between number of games owned and two-
week playtime (ρ=0.28), and between number of games
owned and the total playtime (ρ=0.21). We ﬁnd no
correlation between both the number of friends and two-
week playtime (ρ=0.09) and between number of friends
and total playtime (ρ=0.17).

We ﬁnd stronger correlations when we consider ho-
mophily – the tendency of players to be friends with
those that are similar to them. Homophily has previously
been demonstrated with Twitter [23, 14], where friends
tend to share topical interests, geographic location, and
popularity.

We ﬁnd a strong correlation between a player’s ac-
count market value and their friends’ average account
market value (ρ=0.77), between a player’s number of
friends and the average number of their friends’ friends
(ρ=0.62), and between a player’s total playtime and their
friends’ total playtime (ρ=0.61). We ﬁnd a moderate
correlation between the number of games a player owns
and the average number of games the player’s friends
own (ρ=0.45). An example plot of these correlations is
shown in Figure 11, which shows the correlation for mar-
ket value. These correlations indicate that players tend
to befriend those who are similar in terms of popularity,
playtime, money spent, and games owned.

8. EVOLUTION

In this section we discuss the evolution of user behavior
over time. While we have performed a comprehensive
analysis of gamer behavior on Steam, our data provides
but a single aggregate measure of each user’s behavior
in total, from the moment their account was created
until the time we collected their data. This raises two
questions: are our results truly representative of the
behavior of Steam users or are they an artifact of the

90period for our sample of users. In constructing this set,
we ﬁrst removed all users who did not play at all during
this seven-day period. We then ordered users by the
number of hours they played on the ﬁrst day, from 0 to
24. Colors in the graph range from white, for 0 hours,
to black, for 24 hours. On all subsequent days, users
occupy the same position along the x-axis they occupied
on the ﬁrst day, with their corresponding playtime on
that speciﬁc day colored in the same manner, illustrating
any changes in their playing behavior over these seven
days.

Viewing the graph over all seven days indicates that
many users who did not play on the ﬁrst day of our col-
lection played signiﬁcant amounts of time on subsequent
days. In other words, game playtime is not a charac-
teristic unique to a singular group of “heavy hitters”.
Instead, a variety of players have heavy usage on some
days and lower usage on other days. Changes in indi-
vidual behavior notwithstanding, there is still a general
trend wherein the players who played the most on the
ﬁrst day generally play more than their counterparts
on subsequent days (as evidenced by the overall lighter
shading of the left half of the graph).

9. ACHIEVEMENTS

The Steam API was recently updated with an end-
point to obtain information about in-game achievements.
Achievements are rewards given to players for complet-
ing various tasks while in-game, which are deﬁned by the
game developers. Achievement completion is permanent
and users have the option of displaying a selection of
their achievements on their proﬁles. Achievement lists
and statistics are also available publicly as a means for
users to compare their game performance to one another
or to the community at large. On May 6th, 2016, we
collected achievement data for each game on Steam. For
each game, this included the name of each achievement
and percentage of players who earned that achievement.
For each game, only players who own that game are con-
sidered in the game’s achievement completion records.
We analyzed the achievement records to ﬁnd possi-
ble correlations between achievements and game-playing
behaviors. First, we assessed whether the number of
achievements a game oﬀers has any correlation with
amount of time players spend playing that game. The
number of achievements oﬀered by games ranges from 0
to 1629, with a mode of 12, an average of 33.1, and a me-
dian of 24. When evaluating games’ cumulative playtime
with respect to the number of achievements they oﬀer,
we found a very weak positive correlation (Spearman’s
correlation, R = 0.16). However, when we constrain
the range of oﬀered achievements to only games that
oﬀer 1-90 achievements, we ﬁnd a moderate correlation
(R = 0.53). Beyond the range of 90 achievements oﬀered,
there is no correlation with playtime (R = −0.02).

This suggests a possibility that achievements incen-
tivize more playtime than would have otherwise occurred.

Figure 11: Correlation of market value with friends’
market value. (ρ=0.77)

time when we collected our data? Does user behavior
change over time?

To answer these questions, we collected two additional
data sets. Recall that we collected game ownership and
playtime data for 108.7 million Steam accounts between
May 5th, 2013 and November 5th, 2013. We created
another snapshot of game data for the same users roughly
a year later, between August 14th, 2014 and October
3rd, 2014. Additionally, to examine user behavior on
a ﬁner-grained timescale, we collected game data for a
sample of 0.5% of our user set over a week’s time, from
Saturday, November 1st through Friday, November 7th,
2014. (Collecting this data every day for all users is not
possible due to voluntary rate limiting on the API, as
requested by Valve.) To sample users, we ordered them
based on their total minutes played over the lifetime
of their account. We then selected a uniform, random
sample of 0.5% of all users across this space.

In examining our second, full snapshot, we ﬁnd that,
on the whole, while the magnitude of values in the tail
change drastically, the distribution classiﬁcations remain
unchanged from those presented earlier (see Table 4 in
the Appendix), bolstering conﬁdence in our analyses.
Particularly fascinating, however, is the ﬁnding that de-
spite these huge increases in the magnitude of resource
expenditures by Steam users in the heavy tail, the mag-
nitude of 80th percentile values did not change to nearly
the same degree. For reference, the highest account mar-
ket value in our ﬁrst snapshot, $24,315.40, increased to
$46,633.69 in our second, although the 80th percentile
account market value only increased from $150.88 to
$224.93. The game ownership numbers depict this behav-
ior in an even more dramatic fashion: the top ownership
number in the ﬁrst snapshot of 2,148 games increased
to 3,919 whereas the 80th percentile ownership number
changed only from 10 to 15.

Figure 12 shows the playtime per-day over a one week

91Figure 12: User playtime tracked over a week. We followed a sample of 0.5% of the Steam population over the period
of a week. These users are represented by lines on the ﬁgure, with darker lines representing greater playtime. On day
one, these users were sorted by their playtime on that day from lowest to highest. The lines representing these users
occupy the same position on the x-axis across all subsequent days, allowing their behavior to be visually followed
through the progression of this week-long period.

However, we note that this is merely a moderate cor-
relation as currently studied and the relationship may
be due to other factors. For example, it could be that
higher-quality games that would be played more anyway
simply have developers who choose to take advantage
of Steam’s achievement features. If the relationship is
causal, though, it is interesting to note that it does not
endure beyond 90 achievements oﬀered. We hypothe-
size that this bound could be due to user perception of
the quality of those achievements and possible fatigue
when faced with collecting so many. One Reddit user re-
marked on his pursuit of achievements by saying, “when
I ﬁrst play through a game, I play it the way I want to
play it. When I’m done, should I choose, I like to go
for achievements just to elongate the game some more.
Sure, there will be stupid achievements that will be way
too hard or uninteresting for me to complete, so I don’t
do [those]”.

Next, we evaluated achievement collection behavior
with respect to game attributes. Intuition suggests that
there may be a diﬀerence in achievement gathering be-
havior between single player and multiplayer games,
as the latter can provide extended playtime behavior
through the originality of interaction with others. How-
ever, we found that the mode of the average completion
rate for both types of games was 5% (the mode number
of achievements oﬀered by both types of games is 12).
In addition, the medians of the average completion rates
were 11% for single player games and 12% for multiplayer
games (where the median of achievements oﬀered were
24 and 21, respectively). Inspecting the corresponding
averages of these results yielded similar results, but both
values were also much higher (14% average completion
for multiplayer, 15% for single player), suggesting that
there is a minority group of players who aggressively
seek achievements and skew the average above both
the median and the mode. Players in this group are
known to the community as “achievement hunters”. We
note, however, that such data is also consistent with
alternative hypotheses. For example, it could be that
a portion of games oﬀer achievements that are easily

obtained relative to those of other games, oﬀsetting the
average from the median in a similar fashion.

Further assessment of the existence and nature of the
achievement hunter group requires access to individual
players’ achievement statistics instead of aggregations
collected. We also found that achievement completion
varies based on the genre of the game being played. For
example, Adventure games oﬀer a fairly average amount
of achievements but have the highest average completion
rate (19%) and Strategy games have a very low average
amount of achievements but their completion rate is also
low (11%). These could be due to diﬀerences in the type
and diﬃculty of achievements oﬀered in diﬀering genres,
or diﬀerences in the goals of their respective players. We
leave further analysis of achievement nature to future
work.

10. DISCUSSION

To get an overall view of our data, we calculated
several useful percentiles for the major distributions we
reported earlier, as shown in Table 3. Most gamers spend
modest amounts of time and money playing games, and
half did not play at all during the two week period we
measured and are not otherwise highly engaged in terms
of friends, games owned, or money spent. The vast ma-
jority of gamers appear to be casual players. Signiﬁcant
future work will require identifying and interviewing
individual players across the spectrum of behaviors to
better understand gamers and their motivations. We
reﬂect on how these numbers impact a number of related
research areas.
10.1 Gamer Stereotypes

Stereotypes of gamers are prevalent in society, charac-
terizing them as “isolated, pale-skinned teenage boys sit
hunched forward on a sofa in some dark basement space,
obsessively mashing buttons” [12]. Early work debunk-
ing this stereotype primarily relies on interviews and
surveys, while more recent papers have collected data
directly from game logs or via APIs. The seminal work
in this area is a study by Williams, Yee, and Caplan

92Attribute

Friends

Owned games

Group membership

Account market value

Total playtime

Two-week playtime

50th percentile

80th percentile

90th percentile

95th percentile

99th percentile

4
4
2

$49.97
34 hrs
0 hrs

15
10
7

$150.88
336.4 hrs

0 hrs

29
21
13

$317.64
739.8 hrs
8.7 hrs

50
39
22

$587.63

1233.9 hrs
25.5 hrs

122
115
62

$1,593.78
2660.1 hrs
70.8 hrs

Table 3: Percentiles computed on various game player attributes.

that surveys 7,000 players of EverQuest II, a massively
multiplayer online (MMO) game, and compares this self-
reported data to measurements collected by the game
operator [24]. Their study debunks a number of stereo-
types regarding gamers, ﬁnding that gamers are older
than expected, and that women play more than men.

Our work adds additional evidence to this area, par-
ticularly related to whether gamers as a whole spend
most of their time playing. Over the 108.7 million users
we measure, the 90th percentile for two week playtime
is 8.7 hours, or a little over a half hour per day. Even
the 95th percentile is 25.5 hours over a two week period,
or under 2 hours per day. The majority of users exhibit
behaviors far below these values. This demonstrates the
potential to ground studies of gamers in the massive
quantities of data that are now available.

10.2 Game Addiction

Internet game addiction is a hotly debated topic.
There has been a wide variability in reported rates of
addiction, ranging anywhere from 0.2% in Germany [7]
to 46% [22] in Taiwan, however these variations appear
to be due to improper research methods – study samples
tended to be non-representative, limited in scope, and re-
lied on self-reported data [21, 7, 19]. Reported high rates
of addiction result from studying subgroups of gamers
in the online role-playing community, whereas studies
using representative samples typically report addiction
rates less than 5% [7]. A review of the literature by
Kuss and Griﬃths [13] ﬁnds that addiction prevalence
among students ranges from 2.2% to 12%, in various dif-
ferent age groups, and that prevalence among all gamers
ranges from 8% to 12%. However, the literature uses
diﬀerent assessments of what constitutes addiction as
well as diﬀerent participant groups.

While it is beyond the scope of this work to address the
issue of online game addiction, our data provides a much
broader picture of user playing time and money spent,
covering many more games and users than previously
studied.
In addition, the data set we have compiled
and analyzed is comprehensive, as opposed to sampled;
includes measurements of playtime and game ownership
that have been collected by the service itself, rather than
self-reported; and covers a wide range of users spanning
the entirety of the Steam user base as opposed to select
groups such as those that are fans of a particular game

or genre. Our data could help the community deﬁne a
cutoﬀ for what is considered addicting; for example, the
top 1% play more than 5 hours a day, have hundreds of
games, or have spent thousands of dollars. Because we
collected so much data, this 1% represents over a million
gamers, so this demographic should be studied in more
depth. Future work with this data could follow up with
individual players to study how their expenditures of
time and money may qualify as addiction.
10.3 Social Networking Among Gamers

While Steam is only partly a social network, we can
relate our measurements of Steam’s friendships to the ex-
tensive measurements that have been performed of other
social networks. The primary result we see is that Steam
is best characterized as a network of friends, rather than
a network where celebrity accounts may gather very
large numbers of followers. All Steam friendships are
reciprocal, most users have very few friendships, and the
maximum number of friends is capped by various Steam
policies. In addition, the network exhibits a strong ho-
mophily with respect to friends – as users have more
friends, they tend to connect to those with more friends.
This is similar to the correlations seen in a measurement
of Flickr [17], indicating the Steam friendship network
functions like other networks without celebrities. Finally,
Steam’s network follows a lognormal distribution, similar
to studies of Google+ [15] and Facebook [20]. In a net-
work with a lognormal distribution of friends, this means
that probabilistically there will be more users with a
small number of friends than in a power-law network.
This is in contrast with measurements of Twitter [14]
and YouTube [17], which indicate that these networks
follow a power law distribution (though in some cases
the analysis is only graphical).

11. CONCLUSION

The vast scale of Steam, both by number of games
and by number of users, reveals the tremendous diversity
of behavior among gamers. This diversity of behavior
manifests itself as a continuous spectrum wherein every
possible behavior is embodied. Most players exhibit
modest behaviors associated with casual gaming, with
outliers who have more extreme or unusual behavior.
We ﬁnd a variety of strong correlations that indicate
social networking shapes how users play. A data set this

93comprehensive oﬀers numerous possibilities for followup
research to gather qualitative data from individual users
and correlate this to their quantiﬁed playing habits.
12. REFERENCES
[1] J. Alstott, E. Bullmore, and D. Plenz. powerlaw: a

Python package for analysis of heavy-tailed
distributions. PLOS ONE, 9(1), 2014.

[2] R. Becker, Y. Chernihov, Y. Shavitt, and

N. Zilberman. An analysis of the Steam community
network evolution. In IEEE Society of Electrical &
Electronics Engineers in Israel (SEEEI), 2012.
[3] J. Blackburn, R. Simha, N. Kourtellis, X. Zuo,

C. Long, M. Ripeanu, J. Skvoretz, and
A. Iamnitchi. Cheaters in the Steam community
gaming social network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1112.4915, 2011.

[4] A. Clauset, C. R. Shalizi, and M. E. Newman.

Power-law distributions in empirical data. Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM)
Review, 51(4):661–703, 2009.

[5] Y. Ding, Y. Du, Y. Hu, Z. Liu, L. Wang, K. Ross,
and A. Ghose. Broadcast yourself: Understanding
YouTube uploaders. In ACM Internet
Measurement Conference (IMC), 2011.

[6] N. Ducheneaut, N. Yee, E. Nickell, and R. J.
Moore. Alone together?: Exploring the social
dynamics of massively multiplayer online games. In
ACM Coference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (SIGCHI), 2006.

[7] R. Festl, M. Scharkow, and T. Quandt.
Problematic computer game use among
adolescents, younger and older adults. Addiction,
108(3):592–599, 2013.

[8] M. D. Griﬃths, M. N. Davies, and D. Chappell.

Breaking the stereotype: The case of online
gaming. CyberPsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 6(1):81–91, 2003.

[9] Humble Bundle. Humble Bundle: PC and Android

10. https://www.humblebundle.com/. Online;
accessed 9-Nov-2014.

[10] A. S. Kahn, R. Ratan, and D. Williams. Why we

distort in self-report: Predictors of self-report
errors in video game play. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 2014.

[11] R. Kowert, R. Festl, and T. Quandt. Unpopular,
overweight, and socially inept: Reconsidering the
stereotype of online gamers. CyberPsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 2013.

[12] R. Kowert, M. D. Griﬃths, and J. A. Oldmeadow.

Geek or chic? Emerging stereotypes of online
gamers. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society,
32(6):471–479, 2012.

[13] D. J. Kuss and M. D. Griﬃths. Internet gaming

addiction: A systematic review of empirical
research. International Journal of Mental Health
and Addiction, 10(2):278–296, 2012.

[14] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is

Twitter, a social network or a news media? In
ACM World Wide Web Conference (WWW), 2010.

[15] G. Magno, G. Comarela, D. Saez-Trumper,

M. Cha, and V. Almeida. New kid on the block:
Exploring the Google+ social graph. In ACM
Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), 2012.

[16] W. Mason and A. Clauset. Friends FTW!

friendship and competition in Halo: Reach. In
ACM Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 2013.

[17] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. P. Gummadi,

P. Druschel, and B. Bhattacharjee. Measurement
and analysis of online social networks. In ACM
Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), 2007.

[18] M. Mitzenmacher. Editorial: The future of power
law research. Internet Mathematics, 2(4):525–534,
2005.

[19] N. M. Petry. Commentary on van rooij et al.:

Gaming addiction–a psychiatric disorder or not?
Addiction, 106(1):213–214, 2011.

[20] J. Ugander, B. Karrer, L. Backstrom, and

C. Marlow. The anatomy of the Facebook social
graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:1111.4503, 2011.
[21] A. J. Van Rooij, T. M. Schoenmakers, A. A.

Vermulst, R. J. Van Den Eijnden, and D. Van
De Mheen. Online video game addiction:
identiﬁcation of addicted adolescent gamers.
Addiction, 106(1):205–212, 2011.

[22] C.-S. Wan and W.-B. Chiou. Psychological motives

and online games addiction: Atest of ﬂow theory
and humanistic needs theory for taiwanese
adolescents. CyberPsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 9(3):317–324, 2006.

[23] J. Weng, E.-P. Lim, J. Jiang, and Q. He.

Twitterrank: ﬁnding topic-sensitive inﬂuential
twitterers. In ACM International Conference on
Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), 2010.

[24] D. Williams, N. Yee, and S. E. Caplan. Who plays,
how much, and why? Debunking the stereotypical
gamer proﬁle. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 13(4):993–1018, 2008.

[25] N. Yee. The demographics, motivations, and

derived experiences of users of massively multi-user
online graphical environments. Presence:
Teleoperators and virtual environments,
15(3):309–329, 2006.

[26] N. Yee. Motivations for play in online games.

CyberPsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking,
9(6):772–775, 2006.

94APPENDIX

To classify distributions, we use the Python power-
law 1.3 package [1]. First, the tool ﬁts the provided
data to power law and lognormal parameters, which are
included in our downloadable dataset. Next, because
there are multiple classes of heavy-tailed distributions,
the tool compares the data between successive pairs of
heavy-tailed distribution classes in order to determine
the best ﬁt. The tested spectrum spans four classes,
ranging from an exponentially bounded distribution at
one end (meaning a non-heavy-tailed distribution) to a
true power law distribution at the other end. The two
intermediate classes are, with respect to the order given
above, lognormal and truncated power law. The trun-
cated power law describes a distribution which primarily
follows a power law but is “truncated” at the end by an
exponentially bounded tail.

Distribution

Power law vs.
exponential

Power law vs.

lognormal

Table 4 shows the likelihood values and ﬁnal classiﬁca-
tions resulting from the pair-wise comparisons made by
the tool. At each step, the classiﬁcation process involves
three factors. First, for each comparison, the calculated
likelihood ratio (R) is compared to zero. A value signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent from zero allows classiﬁcation to proceed
to the next step. Next, the sign of R indicates which
of the two compared distributions is more likely; a posi-
tive value prefers the ﬁrst distribution, while a negative
value favors the second. Finally, a p-value states the
conﬁdence with which the classiﬁcation is made. For a
small p-value, i.e. (p < 0.05), we can state with high
conﬁdence that the classiﬁcation assigned by R is statis-
tically signiﬁcant. For higher values of p, neither class
is a statistically better ﬁt than its counterpart.

Truncated power law vs. Truncated power law vs.

Classiﬁcation

power law

Account market values
Account market values (second snapshot)
Total playtime
Total playtime (second snapshot)
Two-week playtime
Two-week playtime (second snapshot)
Game ownership
Game ownership (second snapshot)
Played game ownership
Played game ownership (second snapshot)
Group size
Group membership per user
Friendship (through 2009)
Friendship (through 2010)
Friendship (through 2011)
Friendship (through 2012)
Friendship (through 2013)
Friendship (2009 only)
Friendship (2010 only)
Friendship (2011 only)
Friendship (2012 only)
Friendship (2013 only)

R

7422.963
9685.442
455501.857
544385.180
28049.688
23981.993
5247.774
8271.094
3343.406
5914.060
3381.435
4812.540
727.727
609.157
685.893
460.516
1921.317
245.003
402.606
614.630
653.744
1864.431

P

9.15E−104
1.73E−95
0
0
0
0
1.59E−47
9.75E−56
8.39E−32
1.34E−37
5.15E−28
7.35E−37
3.43E−15
1.83E−11
1.54E−11
1.67E−07
1.48E−27
4.65E−13
6.34E−11
5.51E−14
2.16E−14
5.95E−25

R
−49.578
−43.527
−22961.173
−37595.782
−1678.422
−1101.598
−31.021
−19.209
−24.832
−27.350
−0.967
−13.006
−51.378
−80.858
−97.851
−138.067
−75.725
−22.693
−30.243
−29.295
−38.515
−61.474

P

R

4.74E−12
50.486
3.39E−10
52.872
0
18402.092
0
28263.279
0
2172.226
4.83E−204 1764.264
3.93E−07
28.565
3.15E−05
26.552
2.81E−07
27.651
1.85E−08
33.604
2.097
0.604
2.24E−05
12.374
5.62E−09
53.920
5.11E−12
77.856
2.51E−14
90.753
5.43E−32
86.126
2.88E−13
82.802
4.03E−05
20.752
6.13E−07
24.288
4.35E−06
24.177
7.61E−08
27.385
8.93E−12
46.751

P

0
0
0
0
0
0
4.09E−14
3.16E−13
1.03E−13
2.22E−16
0.041
6.54E−07
0
0
0
0
0
1.18E−10
3.18E−12
3.56E−12
1.35E−13
0

lognormal

R

P

0.907
9.344
−4559.081
−9332.504
493.804
662.666
−2.456
7.343
2.819
6.254
1.129
−0.632
2.542
−3.002
−7.097
−51.941
7.0767
0.924
−5.954
−5.118
−11.130
−14.724

0.861
Long-tailed
0.082
Long-tailed
1.22E−68 Lognormal
2.45E−31 Lognormal
1.22E−68 Truncated power law
5.06E−140 Truncated power law
0.602
Long-tailed
0.069
Long-tailed
0.494
Long-tailed
0.218
Long-tailed
0.541
Heavy-tailed
0.808
Long-tailed
0.635
Long-tailed
0.680
Long-tailed
0.392
Long-tailed
2.24E−09 Lognormal
Long-tailed
0.337
Long-tailed
0.0683
Long-tailed
0.120
0.212
Long-tailed
Lognormal
0.0219
Lognormal
0.027

Table 4: Distribution classiﬁcation and likelihood tests

95