Leave Your Phone at the Door:

Side Channels that Reveal Factory Floor Secrets

Avesta Hojjati1,∗, Anku Adhikari1,2,∗, Katarina Struckmann1,∗,
Edward J. Chou1, Thi Ngoc Tho Nguyen2, Kushagra Madan1,

Marianne S. Winslett1,2, Carl A. Gunter1, William P. King1

1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
2Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
{hojjati2,aadhikr2,struckm2,ejchou2,kushagra,winslett,cgunter,wpk}@illinois.edu

tho.nguyen@adsc.com.sg

ABSTRACT
From pencils to commercial aircraft, every man-made object must
be designed and manufactured. When it is cheaper or easier to steal a
design or a manufacturing process speciﬁcation than to invent one’s
own, the incentive for theft is present. As more and more manufac-
turing data comes online, incidents of such theft are increasing.

In this paper, we present a side-channel attack on manufacturing
equipment that reveals both the form of a product and its manufac-
turing process, i.e., exactly how it is made. In the attack, a human
deliberately or accidentally places an attack-enabled phone close
to the equipment or makes or receives a phone call on any phone
nearby. The phone executing the attack records audio and, optional-
ly, magnetometer data. We present a method of reconstructing the
product’s form and manufacturing process from the captured data,
based on machine learning, signal processing, and human assistance.
We demonstrate the attack on a 3D printer and a CNC mill, each
with its own acoustic signature, and discuss the commonalities in the
sensor data captured for these two different machines. We compare
the quality of the data captured with a variety of smartphone models.
Capturing data from the 3D printer, we reproduce the form and
process information of objects previously unknown to the recon-
structors. On average, our accuracy is within 1 mm in reconstructing
the length of a line segment in a fabricated object’s shape and within
1 degree in determining an angle in a fabricated object’s shape.

We conclude with recommendations for defending against these

attacks.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Hackers have noticed the large amount of valuable information
available in the cyber-physical systems on manufacturing factory
ﬂoors. In addition to straightforward data theft, adversaries can, in
theory, take advantage of simple yet effective side-channel attacks
based on electromagnetic leaks, acoustic emissions, timing infor-
mation, light emission, and power consumption [5, 10, 12, 21, 24,
27]. The leaked information can be used to compromise systems
and to obtain or infer sensitive data. For example, researchers ha-
ve successfully partially compromised Difﬁe-Hellman exponents,
factored RSA keys, and broken other cryptosystems by measuring
the amount of time required to perform private key operations [11,
17, 18]. Defending against side-channel attacks requires a level of
security more advanced and more comprehensive than updating an
operating system or installing security patches. Despite the efﬁcacy
of ﬁrewalls and anti-virus software, manufacturers currently have
no effective way to protect against information leakage from their
factory ﬂoor equipment.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.6.5 [MANAGEMENT OF COMPUTING AND INFORMA-
TION SYSTEMS]: Security and Protection

Keywords
Data Security for Manufacturing; Side Channels; Cyber-Physical
Systems

*These authors contributed equally.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS’16, October 24 - 28, 2016, Vienna, Austria
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4139-4/16/10. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978323

Figure 1: The high level system and attack model. Designs and
raw materials are the inputs to a manufacturing process that
produces completed parts. By placing phone sensors near the
manufacturing process and analyzing the data they collect, the
side-channel attack reconstructs the design and the manufactu-
ring process.

In a modern factory, nearly everyone on the manufacturing ﬂoor
carries a smartphone or similar electronic device. These devices
are programmable and come with a growing number of embedded
sensors, including a microphone, accelerometer, magnetometer, gy-
roscope, GPS, and camera. These sensors can capture side-channel
information regardless of the level of information technology or
security sophistication on the factory ﬂoor and inside the manufac-
turing equipment.

We present a novel attack in which a phone’s sensors are de-
liberately or inadvertently used to capture sensitive information

8832. BACKGROUND

Traditional high-value discrete manufacturing relies heavily on
subtractive processes: equipment is used to cut, chip, and grind away
excess material to form the desired product. Interest is high in the
potential for new additive manufacturing processes, which deposit
material layer by layer to form objects. Our attack and reconstruc-
tion methods target both additive and subtractive manufacturing,
represented in our experiments by a 3D printer and CNC mill, re-
spectively.

The manufacturing sector has a rich history of research on obtai-
ning information about a manufacturing process from its acoustic
emissions. Recordings have been used to judge parameters inclu-
ding tool wear, tool breakage, chatter, chip formation mechanism,
material removal regime, sheet metal material hardness, sheet metal
thickness, and the identity of the metal or alloy being machined [6,
9, 13, 16, 19, 20, 22]. Our reconstruction methods use acoustic
information for less benign purposes.

Cyberattacks on the manufacturing sector typically fall into one
of three categories: theft of intellectual property or processes, dis-
ruption of manufacturing operations, or sabotage of products or
reputation [28]. These cyberattacks are already widespread: in 2014,
21% of manufacturers reported a loss of intellectual property (IP) [2].
These observed losses may be the tip of the iceberg, as 69% of all
2012 data breaches were carried out within a few hours, but 64% of
breaches took months or years to detect [23]. Further, the number of
manufacturing cyberattacks is growing fast: the Industrial Control
Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT), operated
by the US Department of Homeland Security, responded to 50%
more incidents in the manufacturing sector in 2015 than in 2014 [14,
15].

IP theft is by far the most common motive of attackers, who can
target product design information, manufacturing process informati-
on, or both. The advantage of stealing design information is clear,
but many manufacturers’ competitive advantage largely lies in the
fact that they know how to manufacture a given design better, fas-
ter, or cheaper than their competitors do. Process information may
include the details of what materials are used and what machines
are used and in what order, plus all the settings of those machines:
which tool head was used, its rotation rate, the material feed rate,
and so forth.

When a phone illicitly records data on the factory ﬂoor, its owner
could be intentionally carrying out corporate espionage, or she
could be an unwitting dupe with a compromised application or even
the innocent maker or receiver of a phone call at an ill-advised
moment. In these latter cases, she may have been targeted by a
third party such as a rival manufacturer, or swept up in a large net
cast by a well-ﬁnanced backer of economic espionage such as a
nation-state. For example, a nation-state hacker might be seeking to
increase the competitiveness of its manufacturing sector, gain the
ability to manufacture objects viewed as important for the national
interest, or learn about its rivals’ capabilities and activities. For
example, such motivations may have been behind the theft of the
design for Lockheed Martin’s US F-35 Lightning II ﬁghter jet,
stolen by hackers allegedly supported by the Chinese government1.
The US and Israeli governments allegedly unleashed STUXNET,
which targeted the programmable logic controllers of Iran’s nuclear
centrifuges, causing them to self-destruct. Allegedly, the Chinese
government has ﬁnanced the large-scale theft of industrial IP [1] and
the Iranian government has sponsored IT intrusions overseas [3]. The
US and Israeli governments have been attributed as potential sources

1“Chinese hackers stole F-35 ﬁghter jet blueprints in Pentagon hack,
Edward Snowden documents claim”: http://goo.gl/Vnvbs2.

Figure 2: The attack setup. For the phone attack, a phone pla-
ced on the same table as a 3D printer (left) or CNC mill (right)
records the readings of its sensors. For the phone call attack, an
attacker on the other end of a call records the call’s audio.

from manufacturing equipment, as shown in Figure 1. We capture
the relevant sensor data by deliberately or accidentally placing an
attack-enabled phone close to, on top of, or inside a piece of manu-
facturing equipment while the machinery is fabricating the target
object. Figure 2 shows this setup. Alternatively, the relevant audio
can be recorded by deliberately or accidentally making or receiving
a phone call while standing next to the machinery or by installing
malware on any other nearby device that has a microphone.

We provide methods that use the captured data to reconstruct a
model of the object being manufactured along with its manufactu-
ring process parameters. We demonstrate the attack on both additive
and subtractive manufacturing using a 3D printer and a CNC mill.
We demonstrate the reconstruction process with a 3D printer and
discuss ways to reduce the attack’s effectiveness.
Contributions. We outline the paper’s contributions below:

• New techniques. We show that the data captured by acoustic
and magnetic sensors embedded in a phone can be used to
identify speciﬁc manufacturing equipment and manufacturing
processes, including reconstructing manufactured objects and
reproducing the processes used to make them.

• New understanding. We demonstrate the feasibility of app-
lying side-channel attacks to manufacturing equipment: in
particular, 3D printers and CNC mills. The fundamentally dif-
ferent operating modes of these two types of manufacturing
equipment indicate that the attack may be broadly applicable
across many types of manufacturing equipment.

• Implementation and evaluation of reconstruction method. We
provide a method for reconstructing manufactured objects
and the processes used to make them; the method is based
on machine learning and signal processing. We show that the
method accurately reconstructs previously unseen objects.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background
information and discusses the motivations of potential attackers.
Section 3 describes the attack model and reconstruction method.
Section 4 provides experimental results, and Section 5 offers recom-
mendations for defending against the attacks and raising the cost of
reconstruction.

884of the Flame malware, apparently designed to increase situational
awareness of Iran’s technical capabilities and activities [26]. In
addition to gathering ﬁles likely to contain technical information,
Flame collected data from the sensors of the devices it infected.

Our approach to factory ﬂoor snooping leverages the fact that
sensor spyware could spread to anyone’s phone and export the data
it captures for subsequent analysis and reconstruction of manufactu-
ring activities. While Flame targeted Windows PCs, similar malware
can be constructed for phone applications. For example, Cai et al. [7]
highlight the capabilities of modern mobile devices for snooping
on users by snifﬁng their smartphone’s sensors. For example, the
Shedun Android malware provides a framework for automatical-
ly downloading and installing undesired new applications and for
serving potentially malicious adware; security researchers consider
Shedun nearly impossible to remove completely. DroidKungFu, tar-
geted at users in China, offers similar capabilities for the automatic
installation of malicious new applications. With over a thousand
new infections per day as of this writing, malware like Shedun and
DroidKungFu provides a channel to reach factory employees. The
malware may even be present when a phone is ﬁrst purchased; In-
dian phone manufacturer Gionee has been accused of this2. Once
a malicious app has been installed, its recording function could be
activated by a geofence around the factory, and could run in the
background of another app with appropriate permissions, such as a
game.

Al Faruque et al. [4] recognized that thermal side channels can be
used to infer activities taking place inside a 3D printer. Closer to our
work, they also investigated the possibility of attacking manufac-
turing machinery via audio recordings. They placed a microphone
close to additive manufacturing equipment to record fabrication runs,
then used machine learning to reconstruct the low-level instructi-
ons (G-code) used to manufacture the object, with an accuracy of
89.72% in reproducing the as-designed object’s perimeter. While Al
Faruque et al. used a high-quality microphone located in a speciﬁc
location in a controlled environment, our work uses ordinary mobile
phones that may be located anywhere near the machine or in the
user’s hand and can target machinery located in any environment,
including public fabrication labs. We employ different reconstruc-
tion methods from Al Faruque et al., and our experiments show
that we reconstruct perimeters more accurately; however, we also
suggest different measures of accuracy that we believe to be more
revealing. A ﬁnal difference is that because G-code is quite low
level, reproducing the same object on a different model or type of
machine requires nontrivial extra work to rewrite the G-code. For
that reason, we provide a higher-level reconstruction suitable for
translation into G-code for a variety of machines.

3. RECONSTRUCTION

Different fabrication machines have different process parameters.
For example, a grinding wheel can run at different speeds. The
wheel could be touching the object being made, or could be away
from it, e.g., while repositioning the wheel to a different location on
the object. The object could be moving past the wheel at different
rates. The same machine could use grinding wheels with different
levels of grit. To accurately reproduce a manufacturing process, we
need to specify the values for all of its parameters.

As no single paper can reconstruct all process parameters for all
major types of equipment, we focus on key parameters related to the
location of the tool head with respect to the object being fabricated
and its direction of travel. These location and direction parameters

2“Wenn der Spion in der Hosentasche steckt” (If the Spy Is in Your
Pants Pocket), Die Welt, 12 October 2014.

Figure 3: Audio magnitude spectrograms of a 3D printer ma-
king the same three geometric primitive objects, a square,
circle, and triangle, at three different feed rates (15, 22.5, and
30 mm/sec). The increase in head travel speed changes the spec-
trogram in a systematic way.

are important for both additive and subtractive manufacturing, and
must be speciﬁed to control machines as disparate as a 3D printer
and a CNC mill. Further, while prior research in the manufactu-
ring community has concluded that many aspects of fabrication
have inherent acoustic signatures, no signatures that specify these
parameters have been established in previous work.

We describe tool head location and direction with respect to the
platform of a machine, which deﬁnes an implicit XY plane and an
associated Z axis. Different machines have different constraints in
traversing this space, and reconstruction can take advantage of these
constraints to simplify the task. For example, a typical 3D printer
builds up an object in horizontal layers. At any given layer, the
printer head moves in an XY plane and can trace any angle in that
plane with respect to the X axis. The printer slowly works its way
up the Z axis, emitting a characteristic sound from this movement.
Further, in an object with multiple layers, each layer must either
overlap the previous layer or have its own support material, so
a layer’s shape is constrained by the previous layer. Likewise, a
subtractive manufacturing operation generally removes material
adjacent to material it has already removed, and subtractive methods
typically also work in layers. We take advantage of this layer-focused
machine behavior by restricting our attention to the XY plane for a
ﬁxed value of Z, i.e., a given layer. Our reference and training data
and validation experiments use nearly-planar objects: 3D prints two
layers thick and shallow cuts with the mill.

Any planar ﬁgure that can be manufactured by machines like
CNC mills and 3D printers can be speciﬁed as a sequence of tool
head movements to be made at particular angles to the X axis for
particular straight-line distances (with curves described by short
tangential segments). We reconstruct both these angles and the
distances. As it can be hard to visualize the tool head trajectories and
phone placements we discuss, readers may wish to refer to the videos
of our printer and mill in action, and an example reconstruction
session, at https://goo.gl/FijZ9T.

The 3D printer head can travel at different speeds (feed rates). As
shown in Figure 3, the printer’s audio signature for a particular angle
changes in a systematic way as the feed rate changes. Zooming in on
these high-resolution ﬁgures, we see that the pattern in the ﬁgure’s
three spectrograms compresses in time and shifts up in frequency as

885overlapping Hanning windows is a standard technique in audio pro-
cessing that helps to reduce the noise in the signal by smoothing it
out. The use of 2048 frequency points gave sufﬁcient resolution for
reconstruction.

When recordings are made in a manufacturing environment, the
audio contains background noise whose energy spreads across all
frequency bands, and in general the background noise energy tends
to decrease as the frequency increases. We found that for recon-
struction to succeed, it is important to reduce this background noise,
especially at low frequencies, to emphasize the useful content of the
audio signal. Thus the third step in building the audio library is to
perform noise normalization in the frequency domain. We estimate
the background noise covariance matrix Rnn based on a portion
of the recording when the machine is idle. Assuming noise is un-
correlated across frequencies, we use Rnn to normalize the signal
spectrogram as follows:

(cid:32)

(cid:112)diag(Rnn) + 

1

Xwhite = diag

(cid:33)

× X,

Figure 4: Raw sensor data from the three axes of the accelero-
meter and magnetometer while 3D printing a square. The rea-
dings vary predictably, providing additional information not
fully captured in audio recordings. We found readings from the
magnetometer to be more accurate than those from the accele-
rometer in explaining tool head movement.

the feed rate increases, though the human eye quickly recognizes
that the high-level pattern is unaffected. For this reason, we focus
on the printer’s default feed rate of 30 mm/sec.

Figures 4 and 5 show example data from the phone accelerometer,
magnetometer, and microphone. The reconstruction method uses
audio and magnetometer data when both are available and just audio
otherwise. When multiple reconstructed objects are consistent with
the results produced by signal processing and machine learning, the
reconstruction method uses a search process, domain constraints,
and human assistance to rule out unlikely and impossible reconstruc-
tions.

We reconstruct the angle of travel of the machine tool head by
comparing its audio to examples in a prerecorded reference library.
We found that angles that are just a few degrees apart have very
different audio signatures, so the recordings for the library need to
include each angle that might be used to fabricate a target object.
These recordings could be obtained from a similar machine model
that the attacker plans to use to fabricate stolen designs or processes.
Alternatively, as discussed in Section 4, the necessary calibration
pattern could be hidden in the design of an object fabricated on a
machine belonging to the victim or a third party, and recorded in an
attack launched speciﬁcally to gather that information for the library.
The result is a library of audio signatures that the machine produces
for each angle of movement.

To build an audio signature library, we ﬁrst use a cell phone to
record the sound that the machine produces when it moves along
potential angle of interest. In this study, we used 1 degree of resolu-
tion, recording angles from 0 to 359 degrees. The sampling rate of
the cell phone recording was 44100 samples/second, the default.

The second step is to transform the recorded audio from the ti-
me domain to the frequency domain using a short time Fourier
transform (STFT), and then produce a magnitude spectrogram. We
used the Matlab function spectrogram for this purpose, with a Hann
(Hanning) window of length 2048 samples, an overlap of 25% bet-
ween successive windows, and 2048 frequency points. The use of

where X is the magnitude spectrogram for the recording, and  =
1 × e−8 is a constant used to avoid dividing by zero. To further
reduce the effect of background noise and unwanted interference
in the library, we average all the frames of the signal of the same
angle along the time dimension of the spectrogram. The result is 360
frames, corresponding to the 360 angles of movement illustrated in
Figure 6. Each frame is the audio signature of the machine head at a
particular angle across frequencies.

Figure 6 shows that most of the information needed to decide what
angle the machine is moving at is concentrated at low frequency
bands. Further, signal artifacts such as aliasing are visible at high
frequency bands. Therefore we select only frequencies below a
cutoff frequency fc for further processing, saving the results in the
reference library. We also record the domain constraints speciﬁc to
that machine, such as its platform size and the value of fc.

After these signal processing steps, the audio of each 3D prin-
ter angle a appears very similar to that of the three other angles
created by mirroring the given angle in each quadrant of the plane
(±a, 180±a); this introduces ambiguity into reconstruction. Simi-
larly, each mill angle sounds like 15 other angles, produced by
mirroring across the X and Y axes and the ±45 and ±135 degree
lines. We suspect that more sophisticated audio signal processing
techniques that can pick out the secondary tones visible in our spec-
trograms (and audible to a keen ear) can be used to tell these angles
apart, but that remains for future work, and we rely on two other
disambiguation techniques described later: magnetometer data and
a search process that exploits domain constraints. For simplicity, the
discussion that follows is written as though the library contains just
one reference angle audioclip for each set of ambiguous angles, e.g.,
only ﬁrst quarter angles for the 3D printer. However, for ease of
incorporating new domain constraints and information from other
sensors, our actual implementation retains reference data for all
angles.

With the reference library in hand and a target object to recon-
struct from its fabrication audio, we begin by cleaning up the audio
by applying the same ﬁrst four signal processing steps as for refe-
rence audioclips: deﬁne overlapping frames, produce a magnitude
spectrogram, normalize with respect to background noise, and retain
only the relevant frequency band. Then we ﬁnd the most likely angle
for each frame of the cleaned-up audio by comparing it to all of
the reference library’s angle frames and ﬁnding the one it is most
correlated with. More precisely, we use a custom matched ﬁlter

886Figure 5: A comparison of the spectrograms from the 3D printer recorded locally (center top), the CNC mill recorded locally (center
bottom), and the CNC mill recorded on the other end of a phone call (right column). The right column compares three phone call
recordings: no speech (right top), speech 2 ft from the recording microphone (right center), and speech directly at the receiving
microphone (right bottom). The annotations illustrate how the spectrograms correspond to the fabrication processes. The spectro-
grams from recordings of the fabrication of the same turbine blade shape display a trace in a consistent shape, even across different
machines; each contains sufﬁcient information to reconstruct the shape. Additionally, while speech overlaps with the frequencies that
indicate machining, the traces are not fully obscured.

Figure 6: Example magnitude spectrograms for audio data: juxtaposed magnitude spectrograms of 360 different angles of machine
head travel with a 3D printer (left) and CNC mill (right). This data is used in a reference library during reconstruction.

function3 to compute the correlation between the audio frame and
each of the reference library frames; this is a standard technique
for comparing two audio samples. The result is one value for each
combination of a target audio frame and a library angle. For each
target audio frame, we select the library angle with the highest cross
correlation value for that frame: this is our best guess angle for that
moment of the fabrication. Then we present the results to the user,
as shown in Figure 7’s screenshot of our interactive reconstruction
framework. The screen shows the spectrogram of the target audio,
aligned along the time axis with a matched ﬁlter visualization, where
the height of each match head indicates the reference library angle
selected for that frame in the audio. When magnetometer data is not
available, this completes the automated signal processing phase of
the reconstruction.

Next, the search phase begins, with optional human assistance to

3For an explanation of matched ﬁlters, see goo.gl/Nrjojv.

steer the framework’s search process. To prepare for this role, a user
requires only brief training in how to recognize changes of angles
and the start/stop of tool work in audio magnitude spectrograms.

In our current framework implementation, the user has two tasks.
First is to click on the points in the audio at which the tool head
changes its angle; these points can be seen quite easily as the edges
of the vertical bars in the spectrogram. The identiﬁed points divide
the manufactured object into a series of straight-line tool head runs,
which we call segments. From watching a video of the 3D printer,
framework users learned several constraints that were useful to
them during segmentation. The ﬁrst two are generic to 3D printing:
the printer begins and ends each run with a particular movement
sequence; and the printer fabricates a 1-layer bounding box around
all the closed ﬁgures it will subsequently construct during the run.
Users also observed a third constraint speciﬁc to the 2-layer objects
we were building: after fabricating the ﬁrst layer of an object, the

887Figure 7: In-progress reconstruction of a 3D-printed star, with spectrogram above and matched ﬁlter beneath. Changes of tool head
direction are visible as yellowish vertical bars in the spectrogram. The audio has been segmented and the search for a reconstruction
that satisﬁes domain constraints is underway. The reconstruction at the lower right will be automatically rejected because it is not a
closed ﬁgure; the ﬁrst erroneous angle is off by 180 degrees, and its mirror image will be considered later in the search.

Figure 8: Segmented audio magnitude spectrogram, magnetometer signal in the X dimension, and regression lines for each segment.
The 3D printer is fabricating a 2-layer diamond shape, and the sign of the slope of each regression line indicates whether the angle
for that segment lies above or below the printer platform’s X axis. The magnitude of a segment’s peaks indicates how far forward
on the platform that segment’s fabricated line lies, which can be helpful for establishing a canonical orientation for the object being
manufactured.

888tool head retraces its path in reverse to construct the second layer.
Together, these three constraints helped the user identify the ﬁrst
and last segment of each fabricated object.

The duration of each segment multiplied by the machine’s feed
rate gives the physical length of each linear segment in the recon-
structed shape, so the accuracy of segmentation affects the accuracy
of the ﬁnal reconstruction. In our experiments, we did not focus on
trying to get segment lengths exactly right. We expect that signal
processing techniques can be used to automate segmentation in the
future, and may be more accurate than a human.

The interactive framework automatically shows the user-selected
segment boundaries superimposed on the spectrogram and its ac-
companying matched ﬁlter timeline. The most common matched
ﬁlter head height in a segment is the best guess angle for that seg-
ment. For example, the third and tenth segments of the audio in
Figure 7 will have only one suggested angle, while the sixth and
seventh will have two.

The user’s second task is to provide optional guidance to speed
up the search process. For example, suppose that the ﬁrst choice
angles for all segments do not produce a reconstruction. While the
search process can automatically identify the segments with the most
uncertainty in the matches, and automatically identify the second
most likely angle for each, the user can also guide this process by
clicking on the matched ﬁlter head heights (angles) that she would
like the search to consider next. This ﬂexibility is particularly useful
when the framework does not have a full set of domain constraints.
For example, we implemented a domain constraint that the tool head
must move at different angles in adjacent segments. Without this
constraint, the framework might assign the same angles to segments
6 and 7 in Figure 7, but the user could click to force the use of
different angles.

Each matched ﬁlter head height may correspond to several dif-
ferent mirrored angles in the reference library. Thus in our experi-
ments, a k-sided 3D-printed object has an audio-only reconstruction
search space of roughly 4k potential objects. (When magnetometer
readings are available, the search space shrinks to roughly 2k, as
explained below.) Fortunately, manufacturing domain constraints
allow us to prune away most of the search space. We implemented
two constraints generic to 3D printing. The ﬁrst constraint is that a
layer should not cross over itself. More precisely, each segment in
a layer should intersect exactly two other segments, one at each of
its endpoints, except that the ﬁrst and last can intersect either one
or two other segments. The second constraint is that at the end of
a segment, the printer head should change its angle of travel rather
than continuing in a straight line or (unless it is the end of a layer)
doubling back on itself. We implemented a third constraint speciﬁc
to the kinds of objects we were building: each object layer should
form a closed ﬁgure in the plane. The framework automatically
explores the search space not eliminated by these constraints and
displays the resulting reconstructions to the user, who can accept or
reject them. If unhappy with all the reconstructions shown, the user
can click on additional matched ﬁlter head heights for a segment, so
that additional angles will be considered.

In theory, a phone’s magnetometers could tell us whether each
nearby motor in a machine is accelerating, decelerating, or holding
steady, and for how long; from that information we could determine
the exact path the tool head traces. In practice, however, we only
found magnetometer data useful for reliably distinguishing between
angles a and −a for the 3D printer. This means that when we have
both magnetometer and audio data for a fabrication run on the 3D
printer, each angle appears very similar to only one other angle,
its mirror image across the X axis. In other words, de facto, with
the phone located near the corner of the printer, its magnetometer

registers the machine platform’s forward and back movement during
fabrication, but does not pick up a signal from the machine’s other
motors and movements.

To illustrate the disambiguation, consider the example three-
dimensional magnetometer signal in Figure 8, which was recorded
with the phone lying ﬂat near the corner of the printer. If the peaks
of the magnsetometer signal in the dimension most closely aligned
with the machine platform’s Y axis are decreasing in a segment
where the machine head traverses angle a, then the peaks of the
magnetometer signal in that dimension will be increasing as the
machine head traverses angle −a. More precisely, our algorithm
for processing magnetometer data uses the magnetometer’s dimen-
sion with the strongest signal overall (X for the 3D printer, Z for
the mill). Then for that dimension in each segment, the algorithm
identiﬁes the peaks in the magnetometer’s magnetic ﬁeld strength
measurements. Our implementation uses the Matlab function en-
velope(x, np,(cid:48) peak(cid:48)), which uses spline interpolation over local
maxima separated by at least np samples; np = 8 worked well
for our phone’s magnetometer data. Then we ﬁnd the regression
line that minimizes the peak points’ average squared distance to the
line. Our implementation uses the Matlab function polyﬁt(x, y, 1),
which returns the coefﬁcients for a line p(x) that is a best ﬁt (in a
least-squares sense) for the data in y. If the slope of the resulting
line is negative, then the angle is between 0 and 180 degrees. If the
slope is positive, then the angle is between 180 and 360 degrees.
Intuitively, a positive slope means that the platform of the printer is
moving toward the phone. A negative slope means that the platform
is moving away from the phone. A slope very close to zero (with
respect to the amplitude of the signal) means that the platform is
not moving closer to or further away from the phone. We found that
background noise normalization was not helpful in analyzing the
magnetometer data for either the printer or the mill.

We found that the sound associated with travel at a particular angle
to the X axis did not depend on where the tool head was located
on the Y axis, so audio for the reference library and target objects
could be recorded with the tool head anywhere on the machine
platform and the phone anywhere nearby. In contrast, magnetometer
readings fall off with the cube of the distance to the source, and
we found that the phone needs to be within a foot of the platform
to pick up useful data. Magnetometer readings are also sensitive
to the phone’s orientation; ﬂipping the phone around essentially
reverses its reading. Still, as long as the phone’s orientation remains
approximately the same while recording, its magnetometer readings
will reliably distinguish between a and −a. More generally, we
expect that the best way to use magnetometer data will vary greatly
for different types of machines, depending on the conﬁguration of
their motors and where it is natural to set down a phone. For example,
if our phone had picked up on the head’s side-to-side movement
only, then we would have been able to distinguish between a and
180 − a, rather than registering only the movement of the platform
forward and back. In fact, when we printed an entire platform full
of diamond shapes, the phone’s magnetometer did seem to register
additional information (perhaps generated at the tool head) while
a diamond was printed in the extreme corner of the platform, very
close to the phone. When magnetometer data is not available (e.g.,
an audio-only recording, the phone changing orientation during
recording as the user moves around, or the magnetometer being too
far away to pick up readings), each angle still appears similar to
three others, its mirror images across the X and Y axes.

We found that analysis of the phone’s accelerometer data did
not improve the accuracy of reconstruction, so we used only audio
and magnetometer data in the experiments. The accelerometer data
does indicate the times at which the tool head changes direction at

889the accelerometer this variation will have a negligible impact on
the reconstruction quality compared to the impact of the variation
inherent in the sensor, the magnetometer works at a much shorter
range, and it may be affected. In evaluating the other sensors’ data
quality, we focused on the Galaxy S6.

Manufacturer

HTC
Huawei

LG
LG

OnePlus
Samsung
Lenovo
Nvidia

G4

X

OS

Model
One M8
Android 6.0
Nexus 6P Android 6.0
Android 5.1
Android 5.1
Android 5.1
Galaxy S6 Android 5.1
Android 4.4
Android 5.1

K30-T
Shield

Nexus 5

Form
Phone
Phone
Phone
Phone
Phone
Phone
Phone
Tablet

Table 1: Compared Devices

a segment intersection, which can be incorporated in the future to
segment the data from the other sensors. Further analysis may reveal
additional information the reconstruction method could utilize.

For a particular reconstruction task, additional domain or pro-
duct constraints may be useful. For example, a reconstructed object
should not extend beyond the machine’s platform. If we know the ge-
neral shape of the item being manufactured, such as a turbine blade,
this context can inform the reconstruction process. If all constraints
are met, we show the reconstructed object to the user; otherwise we
move on to the next candidate reconstruction.

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Setup. We conducted experiments with the Lulzbot Taz 5 3D printer
and Other Machine Co. Othermill CNC mill shown in Figure 2,
hereafter referred to as the “printer” and the “mill.” The X axis of
each machine is controlled by a stationary stepper motor that drives
a carriage on which the tooling (the printer’s extruder and the mill’s
spindle) rides. The Y axis of each machine is controlled by a second
stationary stepper motor that moves the platform. The printer’s Z
axis is controlled by two stepper motors, one on each end, that raise
and lower the full X axis. The mill’s Z axis is controlled by a single
stepper motor that controls the height of the spindle relative to the
X carriage, which remains ﬁxed in height. All experiments in this
section used the printer’s default feed rate, 30mm/second.

We built an Android app that monitors and records the sensor
data on a phone and used it to record the audio and magnetometer
data used in reconstruction. The audio is collected at a 44100 Hz
sampling rate.

Figure 10: The setup for testing the quality of sensor recordings
at different distances from the printer. Starting from the rear
left corner, approximately midway between the X and Y motors,
the phone was moved away at a 135◦ angle.

Figure 9: The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the accelerometer
Y axis and magnetometer Z axis readings on different devices.
The Samsung Galaxy S6, with the highest SNR for its accelero-
meter and second-highest SNR for its magnetometer, is the best
overall.

4.1 Data Quality with Different Devices

To evaluate the quality of the sensor data produced by different
devices, we installed the recording app on seven smartphones and
one tablet, listed in Table 1. To ensure a fair comparison across
devices, we placed each device with its lower right corner 2.5 cen-
timeters from the rear left corner of the printer. Then we enabled
the app’s recording function while the printer fabricated a simple
geometric shape resembling a trapezoid. The printed object and its
process parameters were identical in each trial.

We compared the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the accelerometer
and magnetometer in each device. The Samsung Galaxy S6 per-
formed the best overall, with the highest accelerometer SNR and
second-highest magnetometer SNR. Surprisingly, the Nexus 6P, the
newest model, had the second-lowest accelerometer SNR. The full
results are shown in Figure 9. The placement of the sensors inside
each device varies. While our other experiments suggest that for

Figure 11: The signal power of a phone’s sensor recordings at
different locations from the machine. While the magnetometer
readings drop off sharply with distance, the accelerometer rea-
dings are strong at all locations on the table.

4.2 Data Quality at Different Locations

To determine the impact of distance on data quality, we compared
readings from the Samsung Galaxy S6 at different locations relative
to the 3D printer. Beginning at the rear left corner, the phone was
used to record the same fabrication activity (a simple 45-degree
line) as its distance from the printer was incremented by 2.5 cm.
We moved the phone away from the printer in a line approximate-
ly 135 degrees from horizontal so that it remained approximately
equidistant from the X and Y motors, as illustrated in Figure 10.

890We calculated the signal power of the accelerometer and magne-
tometer readings at each location as a measurement of the effect
of distance, as shown in Figure 11. The accelerometer, which was
measuring the movement of the table the printer was placed on, had
strong readings at all distances from 0 to 18 inches. The readings
decreased slightly with distance, but the output was clear at all di-
stances. In contrast, the magnetometer was measuring a magnetic
ﬁeld, and the strength of a magnetic ﬁeld drops with the distance cu-
bed. The magnetometer readings were unusable at distances greater
than 4 inches. This limitation affects our ability to use magnetometer
data to distinguish between mirrored angles.
4.3 Data from Different Machines

While the data generated by the 3D printer and mill is similar
enough that our reconstruction methods can be applied to both, the
data is also distinct. More generally, each machine has a unique
signature, and types of machines will have distinct sounds corre-
sponding to their manufacturing processes. For example, the sound
of a mill’s spindle spinning and tool cutting is absent in audio from
a 3D printer. The spindle noise alone is sufﬁcient to distinguish
between the printer and the mill used in our experiments. Additio-
nally, each motor of a machine has a signature. Though they are
nominally identical, depending on the conﬁguration of the machine,
each motor moves a different amount of weight. This distinction
is already apparent within our printer and mill: the machine’s X
and Y motors are nominally identical but display distinct signatures.
The frequencies at which the motors emit noise, as a function of
the work they are doing, allows us to differentiate between different
machine models. While this technique would also work to distin-
guish between different models of the same machine type—say, two
printers instead of a printer and a mill—a more complex technique
would be needed to distinguish between two same-model machines.
To substantiate these claims, we compared recordings of the 3D
printer with recordings from the mill. The mill’s and printer’s X and
Y movements are driven by similar motors in similar conﬁgurations,
and we found that the mill’s movements exhibit a clear, consistent,
and uniquely identiﬁable audio signature, analogous to that of the
3D printer. We demonstrate this signature in Figure 5, comparing
the spectrograms of the same turbine blade shape made on the
printer and on the mill. The trace is shifted in frequency on the two
machines, since each motor on each machine has its own signature,
but the two traces exhibit the same pattern.

These results suggest that a recording of a simple calibration
pattern is all that is needed to train either of our reconstruction
methods on most 3D printers and desktop mills, as well as other
types of subtractive manufacturing methods operated by stepper
motors. This calibration pattern could be hidden in the interior of an
object and designed to look like typical 3D printer inﬁll, or hidden in
the toolpath of a subtractive manufacturing operation. If the attacker
asks the operator to manufacture this object and makes a recording,
she now has all the information necessary to reconstruct objects and
machining conditions from that machine.
4.4 Data Quality in a Phone Call Attack

The previous sections focused on the case where phone sensor
data was captured by a malicious phone application. If the data was
instead captured during a phone call, the audio signal will have been
altered by the phone’s noise reduction. Conveniently, the key audio
frequencies of factory ﬂoor machinery tend to lie in the same range
as the human voice, so the phone’s noise reduction does not simply
remove the signal.

We tested the phone call attack on both the printer and mill. The
results from each recording, while noisier, are clear and consistent

Figure 12: The fan shape fabricated to provide example audio
for the reference library.

with the audio recorded directly on a phone located near the machine.
For example, the frequency magnitude spectrogram in Figure 5
shows that the same pattern is visible whether a recording is made
next to the mill or recorded through a phone call. We also tested
the phone call attack while people were speaking. Figure 5 shows
the difference in the audio when a person is speaking two feet
from the device next to the machine and speaking directly into the
microphone of the device far from the machine; even though the
speech overlaps the information-rich regions of the spectrogram, the
trace is not obscured completely and the shape is still clearly visible.
While reconstruction following a phone call attack must rely on
audio only, this method greatly broadens the scope of the attack.
Capturing information from multiple sensors at once requires an
appropriate app to be present on the phone; in contrast, the phone
call attack allows any phone to capture factory audio with no prior
preparation beyond the attacker being prepared to record the call on
the remote end. More generally, an audio-only attack can be execu-
ted using any device with a microphone, which expands the attack
to not only phones but also tablets, laptops, and other computers,
either through malware or by recording a voice-over-IP call.
4.5 Accuracy of Reconstruction

All training and test data for the reconstruction methods was
recorded using a Samsung Galaxy S6 placed within 4 inches of the
printer, i.e., close enough to collect usable magnetometer data. We
did not try to place the phone in the exact same position for each
run.

We built the interactive framework using Matlab, Adobe Audition,
and Python. For both the printer and the mill, we constructed the
reference library from the audio of one pass of the machine head
over the left-hand half of the 2-layer planar fan shape shown in
Figure 12; this shape has 360 different angles of machine head
travel in each mirrored half. A spectrogram of the resulting library is
shown in Figure 6. As mentioned earlier, to prune the reconstruction
search space for the signal processing method, we implemented three
domain constraints in the signal processing interactive framework:
the reconstructed object layer should be within .5 feed units of being
a closed planar object with no mid-segment self-crossings, and there
should be a change of angle at the end of each segment.

The framework’s user was an EE Master’s student with no prior
experience with 3D printers or mills and no prior experience in au-
dio analysis. She prepared for her reconstruction tasks by watching
and listening to videos of a 3D printer and mill traversing a square,
circle, triangle, and turbine blade outline (see https://goo.gl/FijZ9T).
From examining the resulting spectrograms, she learned to reco-
gnize the visual signatures in the spectrogram corresponding to the
start and stop of the machine’s work on an object, the vertical bars

891Figure 13: Results from reconstructing an airplane. The original design model (far left); the CAD design (center left); the fabricated
object (center right); and the reconstructed model (far right).

where the machine head changed its direction of travel, and tool
head up/down. She practiced by using the framework to reconstruct
the triangle and square made by the 3D printer and the mill; due
to angle ambiguities, her results included the actual objects as well
as their mirror reﬂections, which we ﬁnd acceptable for all recon-
structions. We anticipate that crowdsourced workers with the same
training as our user could segment the data equally well. To test this
claim, a second-year computer science undergraduate with no prior
experience with signal processing or audio also experimented with
segmenting, and found it easy.

We tested the reconstruction effectiveness on the 3D-printed out-
lines of a star, an airplane, and a gun. Our user had never seen any
of these designs before.

The resulting reconstructions, along with the original design, are
shown in Figures 13 and 14, and we discuss their accuracy below.
The user reconstructed all three objects, plus their mirror reﬂecti-
ons. However, she described the airplane, which was a B2 stealth
bomber, as a “ﬁsh mouth” and was quite dissatisﬁed with the result,
even revisiting the matched ﬁlter diagram to consider second-choice
values for angles and look for other potential reconstructions. In
other words, our user successfully reconstructed a mystery object,
even though the mystery object was not something she could reco-
gnize in real life so she was not assisted by context. For the gun, our
user reconstructed the original object, but did not a priori prefer it to
variants produced by mirroring the angles in the very short segments
of the gun.

Figure 15 shows the length of each side and degree of each angle
in the original and reconstructed objects. On average, angles are
within a degree of the actual.

For the mill, we correctly reconstructed all angles in a square
(not shown in the ﬁgure); for a triangle, we reconstructed one angle
exactly and the other two with 1 degree of error. The other objects
in the ﬁgure are from the 3D printer, and have similar accuracy in
angle reconstruction.

As we currently perform segmentation manually, error in com-
puting segment lengths is independent of the segment lengths and
reﬂects human judgment and focus. The framework’s user was off
by approximately 1mm on average in indicating segment lengths
for the plane and the star. This error could probably be reduced, as
our main concern was getting the angles right and slightly-too-short
segments do allow fully accurate angle reconstruction. We were
highly accurate in perimeter reconstruction, the measure used by [4].
However, this measure is quite sensitive to the segment lengths of
the target object, as the total error in manual segmentation is directly
proportional to the number of segments, rather than to their lengths.
Even with fully-automated reconstruction, non-expert users could
provide useful guidance during reconstruction. For example, we

Figure 14: Original design and reconstructed shape, for the star
(top) and gun (bottom).

could hear someone clicking a pen in one of the machine recordings.
The click was quite distinct from ordinary machine sounds, and we
knew that it did not indicate a machine event such as an angle change;
but signal processing techniques or a regression model might have
been fooled by it. More generally, when machine learning and signal
processing fail due to irrelevant background or foreground noise, a
human may be able to salvage the reconstruction.

5. RECOMMENDATIONS

We designed and tested a defense that obfuscates the acoustic
emissions from manufacturing equipment by playing recordings
during production. Since noise reduction has been studied extensive-
ly4, instead of playing a random signal, we chose to play recordings
of variations of the part being produced that have small dimensional
deviations from it. The attacker would still be able to determine the
general shape of item being manufactured, which may provide situa-
tional awareness about a manufacturer’s capabilities and the current
activities in their factory. On the other hand, obfuscation can make
it harder for the attacker to separate the target audio stream from
the others and reconstruct the object’s exact dimensions or process
parameters. Because often the small details of the process or design
are exactly the information that an attacker would like to obtain,
it is worthwhile to make them harder to identify. For example, in
high-value manufacturing, there may be a hundred wrong ways to
make an object and one way to make it correctly. Obfuscation could
4For an introduction to the topic, see goo.gl/IFnJ0r.

892with a slight stagger at the beginning, and the resultant composite
audio was played while the eleventh proﬁle printed. Analysis of the
composite audio shows that while the fundamental frequencies were
reproduced, the harmonics were lost during the combination step. In
the eleventh recording, the fundamentals from the ﬁrst ten turbine
blades obscure the data necessary to reconstruct the eleventh, but
the harmonics from the eleventh appear clearly; this harmonic data
is sufﬁcient for an audio reconstruction. In future work, we will
experiment with combining the audio tracks in a way that preserves
the harmonics and matches other features such as amplitude, to
obfuscate the recording to a state that will signiﬁcantly raise the cost
of reconstruction.

Limiting the electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by manufacturing
machinery can raise the cost of reconstruction by making it expen-
sive or impossible for reconstruction methods to determine which
quadrant an angle of travel lies in. Since magnetometer readings
drop off with the cube of the distance from the source, one opti-
on is to increase the size of a machine’s enclosure. We tested this
hypothesis with a large high-end new-model mill at the Digital Ma-
nufacturing Design and Innovation Institute, and found that when
the phone was placed on the machine’s enclosure, the magnetometer
was too far away from the motors to pick up useful readings.

When it is not practical to enlarge an enclosure, improving motor
shielding can help. For example, recent research on interference
shielding has shown that polymer-matrix composites are effective
for electromagnetic interference shielding due to their light weight,
resistance to corrosion, ﬂexibility, and modest cost. These composi-
tes have been used for many purposes (see, e.g., [8]). Additionally,
researchers have shown that composites such as carbon nanoﬁber-
polymer can provide effective shielding for the frequency range
of 8.2 − 12.4 GHz [25]. We suggest the use of composites to co-
ver the stepper motors in manufacturing equipment with a shield
thin enough that the motor is not damaged by excessive heat re-
tention, but thick enough to protect it from broadcasting sensitive
information to an adversary.

6. CONCLUSIONS

Factory ﬂoors produce vast quantities of proprietary data that
can be stolen by adversaries intent on learning about manufactu-
ring process speciﬁcations, product designs, and factory activities.
Nation-states’ activities to obtain this kind of information have
grown over the years, and attacks on the manufacturing sector have
become common. Using a CNC mill and a 3D printer to represent
subtractive and additive manufacturing, respectively, we demons-
trated that ordinary mobile phones can effectively capture these
machines’ acoustic and electromagnetic information on a factory
ﬂoor, and the recordings can be used to reconstruct the objects being
manufactured and the processes used to make them.

As both additive and subtractive manufacturing tend to be layer-
oriented, we adopted a layer-oriented approach to reconstruction,
using 3D printer data to reconstruct the shape and process informa-
tion for three previously unseen manufactured objects. Our method
uses signal processing and machine learning techniques, coupled
with an interactive framework that uses manufacturing domain cons-
traints and a non-expert human to help guide the reconstruction
process. Experiments showed that the method was highly accurate
in reconstructing a star, a gun, and an airplane shape from recor-
dings of a 3D printer, even though the human did not recognize the
airplane as such after reconstruction.

As mobile phones are ubiquitous, so is the potential for carrying
out phone-based attacks, regardless of the state of IT security in a
factory ﬂoor’s systems. Phone recordings may be made deliberately
by an attacker or inadvertently by an individual with a compromi-

Figure 15: Angles and segment lengths for the original and re-
constructed ﬁgures. The triangle is from the mill and the other
shapes are from the 3D printer.

greatly raise the cost of ﬁnding the right method, though this kind
of obfuscation has inherent limits: since every speaker has a unique
acoustic signature, in principle a set of played-back recordings could
be identiﬁed as such and peeled away, revealing the desired audio
within. However, if the obfuscation greatly increases the cost of the
attack, it will make many kinds of manufacturing espionage not
worth the price.

To test this hypothesis, we selected eleven similar turbine blade
proﬁles and scaled them so that the print time was approximately
the same. The ﬁrst ten were recorded as they printed individually.
The audio recordings from these prints were combined and aligned

893[13] S. Hayashi, C. Thomas, D. Wildes, and G. Tlusty. Tool break

detection by monitoring ultrasonic vibrations. CIRP
Annals–Manufacturing Technology, 37(1):61–64, 1988.

[14] ICS-CERT. ICS-CERT Monitor September 2014 – February

2015. Technical report, March 2015.

[15] ICS-CERT. ICS-CERT Monitor November/December 2015.

Technical report, May 2016.

[16] B. Kim. Punch press monitoring with acoustic emission (AE)

Part I: signal characterization and stock hardness effects.
Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology,
105(4):295–300, 1983.

[17] P. Kocher, J. Jaffe, B. Jun, and P. Rohatgi. Introduction to

differential power analysis. Journal of Cryptographic
Engineering, 1(1):5–27, 2011.

[18] P. C. Kocher. Timing attacks on implementations of

Difﬁe-Hellman, RSA, DSS, and other systems. In Advances in
Cryptology, pages 104–113. Springer, 1996.

[19] S. Liang and D. Dornfeld. Tool wear detection using time

series analysis of acoustic emission. Journal of Engineering
for Industry, 111(3):199–205, 1989.

[20] J. K. Nelson. Acoustic emission detection of metals and alloys

during machining operations. Master’s thesis, Purdue
University, 2012.

[21] D. X. Song, D. Wagner, and X. Tian. Timing analysis of

keystrokes and timing attacks on SSH. In USENIX Security
Symposium, 2001.

[22] K. Uehara and Y. Kanda. Identiﬁcation of chip formation

mechanism through acoustic emission measurements. CIRP
Annals-Manufacturing Technology, 33(1):71–74, 1984.

[23] Verizon. 2013 data breach investigations report. Technical

report, 2013.

[24] M. Vuagnoux and S. Pasini. Compromising electromagnetic

emanations of wired and wireless keyboards. In USENIX
Security Symposium, pages 1–16, 2009.

[25] Y. Yang, M. C. Gupta, K. L. Dudley, and R. W. Lawrence.
Novel carbon nanotube-polystyrene foam composites for
electromagnetic interference shielding. Nano Letters,
5(11):2131–2134, 2005.

[26] K. Zetter. Meet ‘Flame,’ the massive spy malware inﬁltrating

Iranian computers. Wired, 2012.

[27] L. Zhuang, F. Zhou, and J. D. Tygar. Keyboard acoustic

emanations revisited. ACM Transactions on Information and
System Security, 13(1), 2009.

[28] S. Zimmerman and D. Glavach. Applying and assessing

cybersecurity controls for direct digital manufacturing
systems. In Cybersecurity for Direct Digital Manufacturing
Symposium, pages 51–64. NIST, 2015.

sed application on their phone or other microphone-enabled device.
Good audio data can even be captured in the background of a phone
call placed or received on the factory ﬂoor. For these reasons, we re-
commend that manufacturers consider obfuscating the side-channel
signals emanating from their equipment by playing audio recordings
of similar but ﬂawed processes and shielding tool head motors or
enlarging machines’ enclosures. Most importantly, manufacturers
should consider asking their employees and visitors to leave their
phones at the factory door.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security under grant 2015-ST-061-CIRC01, NSF under grant CNS
12-23967, and by Singapore’s Agency for Science, Technology,
And Research under the Human Centered Cyberphysical Systems
program. The views and conclusions contained in this document
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied, of the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security and NSF.

8. REFERENCES
[1] APT1: Exposing one of China’s cyber espionage units.

Mandiant Intelligence Center, 2013.

[2] Kaspersky lab survey: One in every ﬁve manufacturing

businesses has lost intellectual property to security breaches
within the past year. Kaspersky Lab press release, August
2014.

[3] Iranian cyber attack on new york dam shows future of war.

Time, 2016. [Online; accessed 13-May-2016].

[4] M. A. Al Faruque, S. R. Chhetri, A. Canedo, and J. Wan.
Acoustic side-channel attacks on additive manufacturing
systems. In International Conference on Cyber-Physical
Systems, 2016.

[5] D. Asonov and R. Agrawal. Keyboard acoustic emanations. In

IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2004.

[6] T. Bifano and Y. Yi. Acoustic emission as an indicator of

material-removal regime in glass micro-machining. Precision
Engineering, 14(4):219–228, 1992.

[7] L. Cai, S. Machiraju, and H. Chen. Defending against

sensor-snifﬁng attacks on mobile phones. In ACM Workshop
on Networking, Systems, and Applications for Mobile
Handhelds, pages 31–36. ACM, 2009.

[8] H.-C. Chen, K.-C. Lee, and J.-H. Lin. Electromagnetic and

electrostatic shielding properties of co-weaving-knitting
fabrics reinforced composites. Composites Part A: Applied
Science and Manufacturing, 35(11):1249–1256, 2004.

[9] R. Y. Chiou and S. Y. Liang. Analysis of acoustic emission in

chatter vibration with tool wear effect in turning.
International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture,
40(7):927–941, 2000.

[10] D. Foo Kune and Y. Kim. Timing attacks on pin input devices.

In ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 678–680. ACM, 2010.

[11] D. Genkin, I. Pipman, and E. Tromer. Get your hands off my
laptop: Physical side-channel key-extraction attacks on PCs.
Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, 5(2):95–112, 2015.
[12] G. Goller and G. Sigl. Side channel attacks on smartphones
and embedded devices using standard radio equipment. In
Constructive Side-Channel Analysis and Secure Design, pages
255–270. Springer, 2015.

894