My Smartphone Knows What You Print: Exploring
Smartphone-based Side-channel Attacks Against 3D

Printers

Chen Song, Feng Lin, Zongjie Ba, Kui Ren, Chi Zhou, Wenyao Xu

SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA

Email: {csong5, ﬂin7, zba2, kuiren, chizhou, wenyaoxu}@buffalo.edu

ABSTRACT
Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, has
been increasingly applied to fabricate highly intellectual prop-
erty (IP) sensitive products. However, the related IP protec-
tion issues in 3D printers are still largely underexplored. On
the other hand, smartphones are equipped with rich onboard
sensors and have been applied to pervasive mobile surveil-
lance in many applications. These facts raise one critical
question:
is it possible that smartphones access the side-
channel signals of 3D printer and then hack the IP infor-
mation? To answer this, we perform an end-to-end study
on exploring smartphone-based side-channel attacks against
3D printers. Speciﬁcally, we formulate the problem of the
IP side-channel attack in 3D printing. Then, we investigate
the possible acoustic and magnetic side-channel attacks us-
ing the smartphone built-in sensors. Moreover, we explore a
magnetic-enhanced side-channel attack model to accurately
deduce the vital directional operations of 3D printer. Ex-
perimental results show that by exploiting the side-channel
signals collected by smartphones, we can successfully re-
construct the physical prints and their G-code with Mean
Tendency Error of 5.87% on regular designs and 9.67% on
complex designs, respectively. Our study demonstrates this
new and practical smartphone-based side channel attack on
compromising IP information during 3D printing.

1.

INTRODUCTION

After decades of development, additive manufacturing (AM),

also known as 3D printing, has been becoming a mainstream
manufacturing process in various industry ﬁelds. Speciﬁ-
cally, it refers to a process by which 3D digital design data
(in the cyber domain) is used to build up a 3D physical
object in layers by depositing material (in the physical do-
main). Compared with the conventional manufacturing tech-
niques, 3D printing has the following advantages: 1) eﬃ-
ciency:
fast and cost-eﬃcient production with less waste
material; 2) creativity: ﬂexible with more complex geome-
tries construction; 3) accessibility: aﬀordable price of 3D

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS’16, October 24-28, 2016, Vienna, Austria
c(cid:13) 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4139-4/16/10. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978300

printers and materials. The global value of 3D printing is
estimated to reach over 20.2 billion dollars by 2021 [42].

With the wide expansion of 3D printing and new merging
materials in application ﬁelds, there are increasingly more
highly intellectual-property (IP) sensitive products manu-
factured by 3D printers. Key industries, such as medical
[26, 17], aerospace [15, 28] as well as biomedical sectors [39,
37], contain conﬁdential IP from personal health-care to na-
tional strategic products. Therefore, IP security in the 3D
printing process chain has received increasing attention in
the last two years. Speciﬁcally, 3D printing can be divided
into the cyber domain and the physical domain. In 2014,
Strum et al.
[38] raised the idea of cyber-vulnerability in
3D printing where a malicious software can alter design ﬁles.
Later on, many security technologies such as encryption and
watermark, were adopted to protect IP in the cyber domain
[13, 19]. However, IP protection in the physical domain of
3D printing is still underexplored.

Considering that smartphones are equipped with a rich set
of on-board sensors, we ask one question: is it possible to in-
fer IP information when a smartphone is placed nearby and
record side-channel signals during the 3D printing process?
This question raises a potentially more serious concern on
IP protection issues in 3D printing. Compared with profes-
sional devices, smartphones are more commonly used and
accessible in daily life, and the side-channel attack using a
smartphone can be inconspicuously launched because of its
portability and pervasiveness. This observation motivates
us to investigate the IP leakage potential in side channels of
3D printers using commercial oﬀ-the-shelf smartphones.

In this paper, we perform an end-to-end study on explor-
ing smartphone-based side-channel attacks against 3D print-
ers. We formulate the IP deﬁnition and attack protection
problem in the 3D printing application. These formal def-
initions can systematically evaluate potential attacks and
guide defense models. After that, we analyze the working
mechanism of 3D printers in-depth and reveal the possible
side channels and their relationship to the 3D design infor-
mation. During the printing process, multiple electrome-
chanical parts in 3D printers will emit diverse side-channel
signals according to the G-code instructions, which contain
the 3D design information. Accordingly, we investigate mul-
tiple side channels (e.g., acoustic and magnetic signals) and
develop a fusion model to infer the 3D digital design. Ex-
periment results show that by exploiting the side-channel
information collected by a smartphone, we can successfully
reconstruct the physical prints and their G-codes with the
Mean Tendency Error of 5.87% on regular designs and 9.67%

895on complex designs. Our study reveals that IP protection in
the 3D printing process deserves more attention, especially
in the era of smartphones and internet of things.

To the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst study to
explore practical side-channel attacks on 3D printers via the
smartphone. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We formalize IP information and side-channel attack

problem in 3D printing.

• We analyze the 3D printing mechanism and explore
multiple side-channel attacks against 3D printers via
the smartphone.

• We validate the feasibility and eﬀectiveness of the

smartphone-based side-channel attack against 3D print-
ers in a real case study.

• We discuss a few defense mechanisms to improve the
design of IP protection in 3D printing against side-
channel attacks.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we introduce
the background of 3D printing and formulate the related
side-channel IP attack problem in Section 2. We investigate
the acoustic and magnetic side channels in Section 3 and
Section 4 respectively. Based on the analysis, we discover
a smartphone-based side-channel attack in Section 5. We
evaluate the performance of the approach in Section 6. Af-
terwards, we discuss limitation and describe future work in
Section 7. The defense mechanism is explored in Section
8. We review the related work in Section 9. The work is
summarized in Section 10.

2. PRELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM FOR-

MULATION

2.1 3D Printing Overview

study, we investigate 3D printers based on the Fused De-
position Modeling (FDM) technology because it is the most
commonly used type in the cost-eﬀective 3D printing market
[29].
2.2 3D Printing Mechanism

Figure 2: The semantic structure of a real 3D print-
ing G-code, which contains the ﬁle handler as well
as the object code.

Figure 2 shows a G-code example for an object, which
contains the ﬁle handler as well as the object code. The ﬁle
handler initializes the printer settings including unit, coor-
dinates, temperature, etc. In the object code section, each
instruction line controls the printer to perform certain op-
erations. Since it is fully compatible with commercial 3D
printers, successful IP attacks on the G-code will directly
result in the IP leakage and product replication. Consider-
ing that the G-code has a one-to-one relationship with the
printer operation, we plan to obtain the G-code by investi-
gating the mechanism of the printer operations.

Figure 1: The 3D printing chain includes the cyber
domain and the physical domain.

As shown in Figure 1, a standard 3D printing chain com-
prises the cyber domain and the physical domain. First, the
designer creates the object model in CAD (computer aided
design) software. The CAD software converts the CAD
model into the standard object ﬁle (STL), where the model
is represented by the surface geometry composed of trian-
gular facets. Second, after receiving the STL ﬁle, the CAM
(computer aided manufacturing) module slices the model
into uniform layers and generates the toolpath ﬁle. G-code
is the most widely used toolpath ﬁle format [11]. It includes
the operational instructions of 3D printers to control the fab-
ricating process. In other words, G-code naturally contains
all IP information of the 3D digital design, such as shapes,
dimensions and volumes. Last, the 3D printer conducts the
physical manufacturing and fabricates the object.
In this

Figure 3: A 3D FDM printer (Ultimaker 2 Go) and
its inner physical structure, including stepper mo-
tors, a heating nozzle, cooling fans and actuation
systems (transmission belt and deformed bar).

A typical FDM 3D printer is shown in Figure 3. The
printing header is placed at the top of the printer and can
only move in the horizontal plane. A nozzle is located at the
bottom of the header. A platform stays in the middle and
can move vertically. The coordinates of the platform are
illustrated in the ﬁgure. When the printing process starts,
the platform is raised up to an initial height (the ﬁrst layer)
along the Z axis. After the ﬁrst layer is printed in the X-
Y plane, the platform moves down by one layer height and

896the printer prints the next layer upon the ﬁrst one. This
process continues till the end when the last layer is ﬁnished.
Particularly, there are four primitive operations involved.
Layer Movement infers whether the printer prints the layer
in the X-Y plane or changes layer in the Z axis. When
the printer prints in the X-Y plane, Header Movement de-
termines whether the header moves at the printing speed
or aligns the position with a fast speed. Axial Movement
corresponds with the speciﬁc axis the nozzle moves along
with in the X-Y plane. In each axis, the nozzle can move
in two directions, which is identiﬁed by Directional Move-
ment. During printing, the nozzle will be heated to change
the state of the material from solid into quasi-solid. Cooling
fans are equipped next to the nozzle to control its temper-
ature. There are four stepper motors, where three motors
control the platform or nozzle movement in diﬀerent axes
and the fourth one (extrusion motor) extrudes the material.
The printing operations are controlled by four motors via
In summary, the primitive printer
the actuation systems.
operations are listed as follows:
• Layer Movement: whether the printer prints in a layer
• Header Movement: whether the header prints object
• Axial Movement: whether the nozzle moves in X or Y
• Directional Movement: which direction the nozzle moves

or change to the next layer;

or aligns position;

axis in the X-Y plane;

in the X or Y axis;

As described above, there are a few diﬀerent eletrome-
chanical parts in 3D printers. These parts will generate a
set of side-channel signals during the 3D printing process.
Given the ubiquity of smartphones, these observations mo-
tivate us to explore the possible side-channel attacks against
3D printing through smartphone built-in sensors.
2.3 Deﬁnition and Problem Formulation

In this part, we begin by deﬁning the key terms in the
3D printing study. We also formulate the side-channel IP
attack problem.
2.3.1 Terminologies
Deﬁnition 1 (IP Pile and IP Set): For a 3D printing
process, let s denote the IP pile that is achieved by certain
attack method. We deﬁne IP set S as a set that contains all
possible IP piles. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne s0 be the complete
IP pile that has all the information about the design and
the 3D printing process (the complete G-code). Therefore,

∀s ∈ S,∅ ⊂ s ⊆ s0.

(1)

Figure 4 shows two examples of s. The left one is the
complete G-code (s0) and the right one is the partial G-code
where part of the information is lost.

Deﬁnition 2 (Side-channel Pile): Let ˆu be the side-
channel data pile collected by the smartphone’s built-in sen-
sors. Correspondingly, it contains multiple side-channel sig-
nals in time series. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne u0 to be the com-
plete side-channel pile containing all possible side-channels
that are accessible by the smartphone. Therefore,

ˆu ⊆ u0.

(2)

Figure 5 is an example of the collected side-channel pile,
which contains the timestamp as well as the side-channel
signals.

Figure 4: Two examples of s. The left one is the
complete G-code and the right one is the partial G-
code.

Figure 5: An example of u, which is the side-channel
pile collected by the smartphone’s built-in sensors.

Deﬁnition 3 (Status Analysis Function): We denote the
status analysis function p as any function which can analyze
the 3D printer status at a speciﬁc timestamp. Therefore,
let P be a set which contains a number of selected status
analysis functions:

P = {p1(), ..., pk()}.

(3)

Deﬁnition 4 (IP Conversion Function): Let Q() be a
mapping function which converts a series of 3D printer sta-
tus into the standard IP pile (G-code). The speciﬁc im-
plementation of Q() responds to the G-code grammar and
mechanism of the 3D printer design.
2.3.2 Problem Formulation
Formulation 1 (Printing Plan Extraction): The goal of
printing plan extraction is to extract the mechanical and the
product-related information from the collected side-channel
pile U . Speciﬁcally, a status analysis function set P is ap-
plied. We deﬁne A be the result set after applying P on
ˆu:

A = {a1 ← p1(U ), ..., ak ← pk(U )}.

(4)

Therefore, A is the integration set of 3D printer status in
time series. It contains information such as the nozzle co-
ordinates, the platform height, the printing speed, the tem-
perature, etc.

Formulation 2 (IP Reconstruction): The purpose of IP
reconstruction is to achieve the reconstructed IP pile (s)
from the 3D printer status collection A using IP conver-
sion function Q(). Speciﬁcally, Let sIP−Leak be the recon-
structed IP pile obtained by the attacker. Therefore,

sIP−Leak = Q(A) ⊆ s0.

(5)

897Formulation 3 (IP Attack Assessment): We verify the
reconstructed IP pile sIP−Leak and assess the 3D printing
IP attack into two levels. Speciﬁcally, we compare sIP−Leak
with the original IP set s0. We term Full IP Attack and
Partial IP Attack as follows:

(cid:40)

sIP−Leak

⇒ Full IP Attack
= s0
⊂ s0 ⇒ Partial IP Attack

(6)

2.4 Threat Model

After formulating the problem, we describe the adversary
attacking scenario and goal. Suppose a design is printed
by a 3D printer and the attacker attempts to obtain the
original IP pile s0 of the design for illegal usage. The at-
tacker does not have any prior knowledge about the target
printer and therefore, can be any common people with a
smartphone. After entering the space where the 3D printer
locates, the attacker places the smartphone near the printer
to collect side-channel information. Note that the smart-
phone does not need any physical contact with the printer.
This is completely unsuspicious due to the pervasiveness of
the smartphone nowadays and it is normal for people to
place their smartphones on the table. With the recording
application running on the smartphone, the attacker does
not even need to be at scene. During the printing process,
the smartphone records the side channel data simultane-
ously. Once the printing process is ﬁnished, the attacker
fetches the smartphone and obtains the side-channel data
pile ˆu. After applying the well-selected printer status analy-
sis functions, the attacker integrates the printer status A in
time series. In the end, the attacker performs the IP recon-
struction using IP conversion function Q() to retrieve the IP
pile sIP−Leak of the design. If sIP−Leak is the same as s0,
then the attacker performs a Full IP Attack. Otherwise,
it is a Partial IP Attack. The attack is unobtrusive and
easy to launch.

3. EXPLORING ACOUSTIC SIDE CHAN-

NEL

The determination of printer operations, especially the ax-
ial and directional movements of the nozzle, is of great im-
portance to reconstruct the product’s contour in each layer
as well as the design IP. There are four basic nozzle move-
ments with respect to the axis and the direction: X-Left, X-
Right, Y-Up, Y-Down. In this section, we validate whether
the smartphone’s acoustic data can be utilized to deduce the
movements.

To conduct the validation, we implement an application
on Nexus 5 (Android OS v6.01) to collect the acoustic data.
We separate the data into the training and the testing set.
Speciﬁcally, we train a support vector machine (SVM) model
based on the training set and evaluate the performance on
the testing set. The detailed experiment setup is described
in Section 4. Figure 6 depicts the validation results. The
classiﬁer well predicts the axial Movement, but poorly de-
tects the directional Movement in each axis. There are lots
of mis-classiﬁcation between X-Left and X-Right, or Y-Up
and Y-Down. To well understand the result, we ﬁrst ana-
lyze how the stepper motor operates and how it controls the
nozzle movement.

The stepper motor eﬀectively has multiple “toothed” elec-
tromagnets arranged around a central gear-shaped piece of

Figure 6: The model accuracy when the acous-
tic data is applied to deduce Axial and Directional
Movement in 3D printing.

Figure 7: The illustration of how the stepper motor
works. The electromagnet in the red rectangle is
the energized one. Others in gray are un-energized.

iron, called rotor. To make the motor turns, ﬁrst electromag-
net is given power, which magnetically attracts the rotor’s
teeth. When the rotor’s teeth are aligned to the ﬁrst electro-
magnet, they are slightly oﬀset from the next electromagnet.
This means that when the next electromagnet is turned on
and the ﬁrst is turned oﬀ, the rotor rotates slightly to align
with the next one. This process is repeated afterwards. In
this way, the motor can be turned by a precise angle (see
in Figure 7). Therefore, if the motor holds still, it means
the printer maintains the activated electromagnet to stabi-
lize the rotor and the nozzle holds still as before. When the
motor rotates in a direction, it controls the nozzle move-
ment through two independent sets of transmission belts,
which have diﬀerent mechanical structures. Speciﬁcally, the
movement direction changes when the energized order of the
electromagnet reverses.

The nozzle axial movement in X or Y axis generates dis-
tinguishable sound because each motor and the correspond-
ing actuation set are in diﬀerent structures. The directional
movement on the same axis (i.e., up or down, left or right),
on the other hand, is determined by the conﬁguration of the
energized order in the electromagnet and the belt rotation.
Therefore, the directional movement is much challenging to

898deduce based on the smartphone’s acoustic data because the
reverse conﬁguration produces similar sound.

A recent study [12] is in coherence with our observation
from a diﬀerent angle. Zoom H6 Acoustic Recorder [10]
was employed to collect the subtle diﬀerence of the vibra-
tion (frame energy) conducted from the motor to the nozzle
when the nozzle moved in two directions in one axis. As a
professional recorder, Zoom H6 is much more powerful in the
recording capability when compared to the smartphone. Ta-
ble 1 lists the main diﬀerences in the speciﬁcations. There-
fore, it is diﬃcult for the smartphone to well detect such
subtle directional information and we need to explore other
side channels.

Zoom H6

Nexus 5

Mic Type

Uni/bi/Omni-

Omni-

directional

directional

Channel Number

Sampling Freq.

Encoding Bit-rate

8

96KHz
24bit

2

44.1KHz

16bit

Table 1: Speciﬁcation comparison between the mi-
crophones on Zoom H6 and Nexus 5.

4. EXPLORING MAGNETIC SIDE CHAN-

NEL AND BEYOND

The mechanism of the stepper motor inspires us to explore
the relationship between the magnetic side channel and the
nozzle movement. Therefore, we perform pilot experiments
to investigate the magnetic ﬁeld from the smartphone’s per-
spective of view when the nozzle conducts the directional
movement in X or Y axis.
4.1 Magnetic Side Channel and Directional

Movement

Figure 8: The experiment setup to explore the mag-
netic side channel. Speciﬁc trajectory is designed to
investigate the relationship between the directional
movement and the magnetic side channel. The coor-
dinates of the smartphone as well as the 3D printer
are plotted respectively.

We implement the sensor data collection application on
Nexus 5 with Android OS 6.01. As shown in Figure 8, the
smartphone is placed on the table to collect the magnetic

data. The smartphone’s built-in sensors have their own co-
ordinates, which are high-lighted in the ﬁgure. Due to the
limitation in space, we only show the study in one axis for
the purpose of demonstration. We design a speciﬁc trajec-
tory which mainly contains two directional movements in
the Y axis: Y-Up and Y-Down. The recording rate of the
magnetic sensor data was 100Hz.

Figure 9: The detected magnetic data when the noz-
zle operates the directional movement in the Y axis.
Speciﬁcally, Y-Up is colored in red and Y-Down is
colored in blue.

As depicted in Figure 9, we plot the magnetic data in each
sensor coordinate, respectively. Specially, the red segment
refers to Y-Up and the blue one refers to Y-Down. Inter-
estingly, distinguishable patterns in the magnetic ﬁeld are
observed. When the nozzle operates one typical directional
movement (either Y-Up or Y-Down), the detected magnetic
data in each coordinate demonstrates high degree of consis-
tency in the signal pattern. The drift in the pattern when
the nozzle moves from one side of the platform to the other
does not aﬀect the overall tendency. The directional move-
ment in the X axis also shows the similar result in the mag-
netic data. Therefore, magnetic side channel contains rich
information to deduce the directional movement.
4.2 Magnetic Channel Model

We utilize the magnetic side channel to predict the nozzle
directional movement. Speciﬁcally, we train the magnetic
channel model based on the magnetic data using support
vector machines (SVM). Feature extraction is conducted to
better represent the original signal in the feature space.

Feature Extraction.

We extract a set of features to characterize the signal’s
directional behavior in both the temporal and spectral do-
mains. Speciﬁcally, the temporal features are computed
from the waveform of the magnetic ﬁeld signal, while spec-
tral features are acquired performing a P-point Fast Fourier

899Figure 10: The proposed magnetic-enhanced IP side-channel attack framework against 3D printers.
demonstrates an end-to-end framework from side channel information acquisition to IP reconstruction.

It

Transform to each signature of the magnetic ﬁeld signal [40].
In the temporal domain, we investigate the signal tendency
by deriving the velocity and the averaged ﬁrst order deriva-
tive. Other features, such as interquartile range, zero cross-
ing rate, mean crossing rate, skewness and kurtosis, reﬂect
the distribution of the signal.

Particularly, for a given signal frame X, interquartile range
(IQR) measures the statistical dispersion within each seg-
mentation, which is the diﬀerence between 75th and 25th
percentiles of the signal over the window:

IQR = mean[X(

n
2

:

3n
4

)] − mean[X(1 :

n
4

)].

(7)

Skewness is a measure of the asymmetry of the probability

distribution of the real-valued data:
E[(X − µ)3]

γ =

(E[(X − µ)2])3/2 ,

(8)

where µ is the mean and E is the expectation operator.

Similarly, kurtosis is a descriptor of the shape of a proba-
bility distribution and refer to the degree of asymmetry and
peakedness of the signal distribution:

Kurt =

E[(X − µ)4]
(E[(X − µ)2])2 .

(9)

Besides, we calculate the correlation between each pair of

the sensor coordinates:

corr(X, Y ) =

E[(X − µX )(Y − µY )]

σX σY

,

(10)

where σX , σY are standard deviations.

In the spectral domain, we explore the spectral energy
and entropy, which measure the energy changes in signal
and infer the motion diﬀerence. Let xf f ti, i = 1, ..., n be
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) coeﬃcient of X.

Energy(X) =

1
n

(2 ∗ xf f ti).

(11)

For spectral entropy, which is deﬁned as the normalized
information entropy of the discrete FFT component mag-
nitudes of the signal, we ﬁrst divide the spectral xf f t into
m sub bins xf f t(j), j = 1, ..., m and normalize them by the
number of bins. Therefore, Power Spectral Density is calcu-
lated as:

P (j) =

|xf f t(m)|2.

1
m

(12)

n−1(cid:88)

2

Then Probability Density Function can be derived by nor-
malizing the calculated PSD:

p(j) =

.

(13)

Hence, we can formulate the spectral entropy as:

P (j)(cid:80)

j P (j)

SE = − m(cid:88)

p(j)log2pj.

(14)

4.3 Acoustic Channel Model

j=1

Although acoustic side channel can not well distinguish
the nozzle direction movement, it can still be eﬀective in
other aspects. The acoustic channel model is trained in
the similar way as the magnetic one. However, we extract
additional features to explore the features in the acoustic
side channel.
In the temporal domain, we further intro-
duce parameters such as mean, median, standard deviation
and variance [24] to represent the statistic features of the
sound. In the spectrum domain, Mel-frequency cepstral co-
eﬃcients (MFCC) are widely used in audio signal processing
and proven to be eﬀective [31, 30]. As a result, we also in-
corporate it into the feature set.

5. MAGNETIC-ENHANCED IP SIDE-

CHANNEL ATTACK

In this section, we introduce a magnetic-enhanced side-
channel approach to attack the 3D printing IP via smart-
phone in the physical layer. Figure 10 shows the proposed
end-to-end framework from side channel information acqui-
sition to IP reconstruction. The detail of each module is
described as follows:
5.1 Side Channel Information

During the process of 3D printing, we collect the side-
channel information via smartphone and pre-process the data
for further analysis.

• Data Acquisition: We implement a smartphone record-
ing application which can simultaneously and contin-
uously collect the magnetic and acoustic data.

• Pre-processing: To remove the signal noise generated
by other interferes as well as white noise, we apply
Savitzky-Golay ﬁlter [34] on the collected data. Com-
pared to the most common moving average ﬁlter, it is a
much better procedure which performs a least squares

900ﬁt of a small set of consecutive data points to a poly-
nomial and take the calculated central point of the ﬁt-
ted polynomial curve as the new smoothed data point.
After that, we segment the signal into separate frames
with a ﬁxed frame size.

5.2 Primitive Operation Analysis

Figure 11: The hierarchy diagram shows the sequen-
tial relationship between the primitive operations
based on the 3D printing mechanism.

In Section 2.2, we introduce the primitive operations in 3D
printing: Layer Movement, Header Movement, Axial Move-
ment, and Directional Movement. The inner sequential con-
nection is determined by the fabrication characteristic of
3D printing. Figure 11 depicts the hierarchy relationship
between these primitive operations.
In order to infer the
printer operations in each level, we extract the mechanism
parameters of the printer (using status analysis functions)
based on the data frames we obtained. After that, we inte-
grate all the information we obtain into parameter sequences
in time series. In detail, we describe the parameter extrac-
tion steps as follows:

• Layer Movement Analysis: For each data frame, we
ﬁrst determine whether it refers to the nozzle operation
in the X-Y plane or the platform movement in the Z
axis. Note that the actuation system for the platform
is very diﬀerent from the one for the nozzle because it
contains a deformed bar instead of the belt. Therefore,
platform movement generates unique acoustic signal.
As a result, we apply acoustic channel model in this
step.

• Header Movement Analysis: When the header prints
with a regular printing speed, it continuously extrudes
melted material. The extrusion unit speed is speciﬁ-
cally determined by the layer height and the material.
When the header performs a quick alignment, the ma-
terial is no longer extruded and a much faster speed is

applied to avoid the stringing eﬀect [5]. The fast move-
ment generates the acoustic signal with a signiﬁcant
pattern. Hence, acoustic channel model is employed
in this step to predict the header status and further
infer whether the material needs to be extruded.

• Axial Movement Analysis: If the nozzle movement is
in the X-Y plane, we need to further distinguish which
axis the nozzle moves along with. Based on the pre-
liminary result in Section 3, we ﬁnd that the acoustic
side channel performs well in predicting the nozzle ax-
ial movement.

• Directional Movement Analysis: Once knowing the
speciﬁc axis the movement occurs, we investigate the
moving direction in the last step. Based on the dis-
cussion in Section 4.1, we adopt the magnetic channel
model to infer the directional information in the X or
Y axis.

• Integration: Eventually, we obtain the predicted printer
operation parameters (Time stamp/Distance/Device
info) in each frame. We integrate all the information
and generate the printer parameter set in time series.

Algorithm 1 G-code Reconstruction Algorithm
Input: A: printer status set in time series

valign: particular aligning speed
vprint: particular printing speed
vz: particular platform speed
win: frame size

Output: G-code: Reconstructed IP information
1: for each F ramei do:
2:

f lagx, f lagy, f lagz, xdir, ydir, f lagalign ⇐ ai // Get

params

dx, dy, dz, de, tmpv = 0 // Initialize
if f lagz = 1 then // Z movement

tmpv = vprint
dz = tmpv ∗ win
Pz = Pz + dz

else// XY movement

tmpv = 0
if f lagalign = 1 then // Align

de = 0
tmpv = valign

else// Print

de = econst // Machine Speciﬁc
tmpv = vprint

end if
if f lagx = 1 then // Move in X

dx = xdir ∗ vprint ∗ win
Px = Px + dx
else// Move in Y
dy = ydir ∗ vprint ∗ win
Py = Py + dy

end if
Le = Le + de

end if
G-code ⇐ G1, X : Px, Y : Py, Z : Pz, E : Le, F :

3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:

tmpv

27: end for

901Figure 12: The classiﬁcation results of operation models. (a) Layer Movement Model; (b) Head Movement
Model; (c) Axial Movement Model; (d) X Directional Movement Model; (e) Y Directional Movement Model.

We employ the supervised learning model, support vector
machines (SVM), as the classiﬁers to predict the primitive
movement. More speciﬁcally, we use the Sequential Mini-
mal Optimization (SMO) implementation of SVM which is
provided in the Weka machine learning toolkit [4].
5.3 IP Reconstruction

IP reconstruction is a procedure which converts the printer
status set in time series to the G-code format using an IP
conversion function. Since the G-code combines both the
printer mechanical and the object-related information, we
develop a G-code reconstruction algorithm (ALGORITHM
1) to derive the IP from the printer status set.

6. EVALUATION

In this section, we analyze the performance of the primi-
tive models and evaluate our method in the real-case study.

6.1 System Setup

As previously shown in Figure 8, the 3D printers we em-
ploy in this study are Ultimaker 2 Go, one of the most
used open-source 3D printers in the market [9]. Our ap-
proach is also compatible with other FDM-type 3D print-
ers, such as MakerBot Replicator [2] since they share the
same mechatronic architecture. The smartphone, Nexus 5
[1] is equipped with multiple built-in sensors, including mi-
crophone with Qualcomm WCD9320 audio codec [8] and
Asahi Kasei 3D Magnetometer Sensor AK8963 [6].

To collect the side-channel information, we implement a
data recording application with Android OS v6.01. The
smartphone is placed near the printer (within 20cm) to col-
lect the audio and magnetic data while the printer is work-
ing. Both the printer and the smartphone’s built-in sensor
have their own coordinates and conﬁgurations. Speciﬁcally,
the audio data is recorded in mono channel with a sampling
frequency of 44.1kHz and the encoding rate of 16 bit. The
magnetic data, on the other hand, is collected with a sam-
pling frequency of 100Hz in the unit of micro-Tesla (µT).
The conﬁguration of the printing speed determines a trade-
oﬀ between the product yield and the time eﬃciency. Faster
printing speed can improve the time eﬃciency yet reduce
the product quality. In our work, we aim to ensure the high
quality of printed product. Therefore, we set the nozzle
printing speed as 180 mm/min and the alignment speed as
7800 mm/min.

6.2 Quantitative Accuracy Analysis

In this part, we address the concerns in two aspects: 1)
What is the performance of each primitive operation model?
2) What is the performance variation of each model with
diﬀerent parameter settings?
6.2.1 Primitive Operation Models
We ﬁrst apply Savitzky-Golay ﬁlter on the side-channel
data and segment the signal into separate frames with a
ﬁxed frame size of 200 ms. Then we partition the operation
frames into the training and testing set according to diﬀerent
models. Figure 12 shows the classiﬁcation results.

Figure 12(a) is Layer Movement Model, which determines
whether the printer prints in the X-Y plane or moves the
platform in the Z axis. The training set involves 2000 mag-
netic frames in each category and the testing set includes
4000 magnetic frames in total. The model can diﬀerenti-
ate the two operations with an average accuracy of 99.92%.
The mechanical diﬀerence in two sets of actuation system
provides rich operation information in the acoustic data.

Figure 12(b) is Head Movement Model, which detects
whether the nozzle is printing or aligning in the X-Y plane.
Speciﬁcally, acoustic side channel is utilized in the model
training. The training and testing set both contain 1000 au-
dio frames (half in each type). The result shows that 95.7%
and 96.1% of the testing data are correctly classiﬁed in each
group. As a result, we can infer whether the machine ex-
trudes material in each timestamp.

Figure 12(c) is Axial Movement Model, which is used to
predict whether the nozzle moves along the X or Y axis. The
training set involves 2000 magnetic and audio frames of the
X and Y axial movement (half in each direction) respectively.
Afterwards, we veriﬁes the model with 4000 testing frames.
The confusion matrix indicates that the overall accuracy of
the model reaches 93.55%.

Figure 12(d)(e) are X and Y Directional Movement Model
respectively. In one axis, we train the corresponding model
upon 1000 magnetic frames for each direction (2000 in total).
We validate the performance by applying the model on the
test set of 4000 frames. The confusion matrix shows that
the model correctly classiﬁes the moving direction of 90.55%
frames in the X axis. Correspondingly, the accuracy in the
Y axis achieves 93.98%.

6.2.2 Model Performance and Frame Size
Frame size is an important factor that directly aﬀects the
performance of the models. Small frame size increases the

902We introduce an error metric to evaluate the reconstruc-
tion performance in 3D printing attacks. The traditional
error metrics, such as Mean Square Error Metrics [16] and
Quadric Error Metrics [20], cannot quantify the true geomet-
ric error because these metrics consider each reconstructed
point independently and estimate the error according to the
absolute diﬀerence. In this case, local sparse outliers (e.g.,
a large error on a single segment) or global oﬀsets will bias
the entire quality value.

We argue that the error metric in 3D printing attack appli-
cations should reﬂect the global reconstruction quality and
estimate the error according to the relative distortions. For
example, the error from certain rigid transformation eﬀects,
such as translation, can be eliminated in the error metric be-
cause they will not alter the IP information. Therefore, we
propose the Mean Tendency Error (MTE), which assesses
the geometrical reconstruction based on the relative shape
diﬀerence. Speciﬁcally, MTE is a geometric similarity de-
scriptor that calculates the direction consistency between
the design pattern and reconstructed pattern. It is formu-
lated as:

(cid:80)n
i=2{|GXi − GXi−1) − (HXi − HXi−1)|
+|(GYi − GYi−1) − (HYi − HYi−1)|},

M T E = 1
n

(15)

where n is the number of sample points, GX, GY are the
reconstructed points and HX, HY are the original points.

MTE

Layer1 Layer2 Layer3 Layer4 Avg.
6.06%
4.57% 5.87%

7.12%

5.71%

Table 2: The MTE results of four layers when re-
constructing the regular design.

Table 2 shows the calculated MTE for each layer respec-
tively. The results range from 4.57% to 7.12%, with an av-
erage MTE of 5.87%. The low MTE over diﬀerent layers in-
dicates that the attack method can accurately and robustly
reconstruct the original design IP.

Figure 13: The accuracy results of the primitive op-
eration models in 3D printing with diﬀerent frame
sizes.

temporal resolution, enabling us to reconstruct the printing
process in ﬁne-grained detail. However, it will correspond-
ingly reduce the frequency resolution in spectral features,
which could eventually lower the classiﬁcation accuracy. As
a result, we explore the performance of the models under
diﬀerent frame sizes. As depicted in Figure 13, the perfor-
mance of the models gradually improve with the increase
of the frame size. Larger frame size means there are more
characteristic information contained in each frame, hence
the data frame will be more accurately deduced in the high
dimensional feature domain. Based on the performance ten-
dency showed in the graph, we select the frame size of 200
ms in our evaluation.
6.3 Real World Evaluation

Figure 14: The reconstructed shape based on the
magnetic-enhanced side-channel attack. The rect-
angle in red line is the designed shape in each layer.
The shape in black line is the reconstructed one.

To evaluate our approach upon the real printing scenario,
we ﬁrst select rectangle as a regular shape since it involves
all the primitive operations. Speciﬁcally, we generate a G-
code ﬁle for a four-layer object, each layer of which is a
90mm*90mm rectangle and in the height of 1mm. The re-
constructed shapes in each layer are depicted in Figure 14.
In each layer, the reconstructed shape ﬁts the original rect-
angle in general. There are outliers in the reconstructed ones
due to the mis-classiﬁcation in certain operations. Most out-
liers are in the Y axis. Such oﬀsets (e.g. in Layer 1, 3) are
generated by the mis-classiﬁcations in the previous X direc-
tional movements. This result is in coherence with the ob-
servation that the Y Directional Movement Model performs
better than the X Direction Movement Model (see Section
6.2.1).

(a) The original shape of
the complex design and the
reconstructed results of ten
layers.

(b) The result after ap-
plying Layer Smooth Al-
gorithm on all layers.

Figure 15: The demonstration of the reconstructed
IP on a complex design.

The real complex design usually contains free-form seg-
ments and inner structures (e.g., a hollow structure can lead
to multiple contours in the same layer), which traditional 3D
scanning cannot detect. Free-form segments can be repre-
sented by a series of motion primitives in X, Y and Z di-
rections. Inner structures can also be reconstructed by the
proposed method because it can recognize the alignment in
printing.

903We test the attack approach on a complex shape. Specif-
ically, the designed object contains ten layers (layer height is
1mm) and the contour dimension in each layer is 90mm*45mm.
As shown in Figure 15(a), the original complex shape is col-
ored in red and the reconstructed result in each layer is plot-
ted in black. The triangle shape is reconstructed by a set
of primitive movements in X and Y. Overall, the shape drift
in the X axis is smaller than the one in the Y axis, which
means that the Y axis movements are better predicted. In
detail, the performance for X Directional Movement Model
and Y Directional Movement Model is 89.83% and 93.67%
in accuracy, respectively.

MTE

Layer5
Layer1 Layer2 Layer3 Layer4
8.36%
10.15%
8.77%
Layer6 Layer7 Layer8 Layer9 Layer10

7.14%

8.97%

MTE 15.87% 10.64%

8.35%

9.83%

8.64%

Table 3: Calculated MTE of each reconstructed
layer for the complex shape.

Algorithm 2 Layer Smooth Algorithm
Input: Layer: G-code for each layer in time series t =

1, ..., n L: Layer number

upon all layers in time series

Output: result: G-code of the smoothed layer contour
1: for t = 1 → n do: // in each time stamp
2:
3:
4: end for
5: result ⇐ [smoothX; smoothY ] //integrate the smooth

smoothXi = 1
L
smoothYi = 1
L

k=1 Layerk(x)
k=1 Layerk(y)

(cid:80)L
(cid:80)L

result

We can observe that most reconstructed layers are similar
to the original contour. The MTE results for the recon-
structed layers are calculated in Table 3. The mean MTE
upon the entire ten layers is 9.67%, with a standard devia-
tion of 2.40%. To address the variation between the layers,
we perform Layer Smooth Algorithm (ALGORITHM 2) to
adjust the contour outliers.

The post-processing result is displayed in Figure 15(b).
The algorithm well regulates the abnormal outliers in par-
ticular parts and generates a smooth contour similar to the
original shape. The real printed objects is exhibited in Fig-
ure 16.

6.4 Practice Enhancement

In this above setting, we keep the orientation of the smart-
phone in both the training and attacking scenarios. For
the sake of the attack feasibility, we explore a software so-
lution to grant the side-channel data with the orientation-
independent characteristics. With this approach, the train-
ing and attacking scenarios are not necessary to be per-
formed with the same smartphone orientation. Considering
the mono audio signal propagates in sphere and is naturally
independent of orientation, we focus on the magnetic side-
channel measures.

According to Euler’s rotation theorem [22], any rotation
of a rigid structure in three dimensions can be represented
as a combination of a vector (cid:126)u and a scalar θ. Speciﬁ-
cally, the rotation vector represents a rotation angle around
a speciﬁed axis and is usually encoded in the form of unit
quaternion [18, 33]. In Android OS, the rotation vector can
be derived from a combination of sensor data from 6-axis
accelerometer, 6-axis gyroscope (Invensense MPU-6515 [7])
and 3-axis magnetometer. The result is returned by sensor
service Sensor.T Y P E ROT AT ION V ECT OR. A typical
function, getQuaternionFromVector(), converts the rotation
vector to a normalized quaternion. Therefore, the rotation
matrix R can be calculated as:

 a2 + b2 − c2 − d2

2bc + 2ad
2bd − 2ac

2bc − 2ad

a2 − b2 + c2 − d2

2cd + 2ab

2bd + 2ac
2cd − 2ab

a2 − b2 − c2 + d2
(16)

 ,

where normalized quaternion q is:

q = a + bx + cy + dz,|q| = 1.

(17)

Therefore, by applying the rotation matrix R upon the mag-

netic data in smartphone-frame orientation, we can achieve
the orientation-independent data in world-frame orientation:

magDatarot−f ree = R ∗ magDataoriginal.

(18)

To evaluate the orientation-independent solution, we em-

ploy diﬀerent rotation angles and record the normalized quater-
nion q, which remains constant when the smartphone is
placed in a particular orientation. The converted magnetic
data in each axis is calculated based on the equations above.

38.0156
37.7480
37.9613
38.2078

10.0244
10.2021
10.2554
10.1768

Angle Mean M agx Mean M agy Mean M agz
−51.7069
0◦
−52.0877
30◦
−51.3041
60◦
−52.3945
90◦
Var. M agz
Angle Var. M agx
0◦
−0.74%
30◦
−0.78%
60◦
90◦
+1.33%

Var. M agy
−0.70%
−0.14%
+0.51%

+1.77%
+2.3%
+1.52%

–

–

–

(a) The original designed
complex shape.

(b) The replicated object
based on the smoothed re-
construction result.

Figure 16: The real demonstration of the original
design and the replicated one based on the recon-
structed IP.

Table 4: The converted magnetic data with diﬀerent
rotation angles.

As shown in Table 4, the converted magnetic data re-
mains stable in each axis while the smartphone’s orienta-
tion changes. The average variations are +1.87%, −0.11%,
+0.43% respectively in each axis. In this way, we are able to

904achieve the orientation-independent magnetic data regard-
less of the smartphone rotation.

7. DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss the current limitations and then

describe the future work.

Distance Eﬀect: Attack eﬀectiveness highly depends on
the side-channel range. Compared to the acoustic side chan-
nel, the eﬀective magnetic side channel diminishes much
faster (∝ 1
r3 ). We evaluate the attack eﬀectiveness with
three diﬀerent distance setups, i.e., 20cm, 30cm and 40cm,
respectively. Reconstruction results are shown in Table 5.

Dist. 20cm Dist. 30cm Dist. 40cm

Avg. MTE

5.87%

12.94%

34.45%

Table 5: The average (avg.) MTE of the recon-
structed rectangle when diﬀerent distances (dist.)
are applied.

It depicts that the reconstruction performance deterio-
rates rapidly when the distance from smartphone to print-
ers increases (as low as the 34.45% at the 40cm distance).
Nevertheless, with the dramatic advancement of the sen-
sors equipped on smartphones, the higher sensitivity will
lead to longer eﬀective attack range. Moreover, attacking
with multiple smartphones is another direction to explore.
Some work [35, 23, 44] have showed that multi-sensor fusion
system can achieve more information in higher dimension,
further enhance the signal-to-noise rate, and address certain
limitations (e.g., distance) in the single-sensor system.

Print Speed Eﬀect: Print speed is a critical factor to
aﬀect the fabrication quality. The best print speed is deter-
mined by the material thermoplastic property. In this study,
we employ the PLA plastic ﬁlament, whose recommended
print speed is 180 mm/min. Some emerging materials (e.g.
soft hydrogel material) can have a quality print with a very
fast velocity.
In the future plan, we will evaluate the at-
tack approaches on diﬀerent print speeds. We expect the
performance will reach a limit on some very fast print speed
setup, and this limitation is caused by smartphone hardware
speciﬁcation (e.g., sampling frequency, sensor sensitivity).

Position Eﬀect: The smartphone’s position has limited
eﬀect on the acoustic signal since the sound propagation is
spherical and fast enough. The absolute magnetic signal, on
the other hand, changes with regard to the magnetic ﬁeld
distribution around the 3D printer as well as the smart-
phone’s position. The directional pattern (Figure 9) might
be inverse when the smartphone is moved to the other side of
the 3D printer. In this case, training phase can be re-applied
to ensure the eﬀectiveness of the magnetic model.

Ambient Noise Eﬀect: Ambient acoustic and magnetic
noise will aﬀect the performance of the prediction models.
The aﬀected degree is tightly related to the noise level.
Light ambient noise can be removed using speciﬁc ﬁlters,
such as the aforementioned Savitzky-Golay ﬁlter in Section
5.1. Strong, wide-width ambient noise will contaminate the
side channels and can be applied as a potential mitigation
method to decrease the attack performance, which is dis-
cussed in Section 8.2.

Carry-on Attack: Another enhanced practice is the carry-
on attack model.
In this threat model, the attackers can
hind smartphone(s) in his pocket and stand around 3D print-
ers. In Section 6.4, we introduce a solution to project the
side-channel data into the world frame regardless of the
smartphone’s orientation. This feature potentially enables
this new and practical attack scenario. In the future work,
we will evaluate the setup where the attacker places the
smartphone in the pocket and stands or walks around the
printer. The signal variation caused by body motion can be
compensated by the built-in inertial sensors [43].

Advanced Shape Exploration: Due to the elegant con-
cept of layer by layer fabrication, 3D printers can build com-
plicated objects with a wide variety of materials and func-
tions. We plan to evaluate the performance on various de-
signs with a diverse shape complexity, such as circle, ellipse,
arc and complex topology. The challenge on these compli-
cated shapes is to accurately identify the printing state (e.g.,
material extruding or not) because the nozzle motion trajec-
tory will become convoluted. The posted process, such as
layer smooth algorithm (Algorithm 2), needs further pron-
ing.

8. DEFENSE MECHANISM

As shown in Figure 1, the 3D printing chain includes the
software process (e.g., 3D design and G-code generation)
and hardware process (e.g., physical manufacturing). We
propose the possible defense methods in two types, e.g.,
software-based methods and hardware-based methods.
8.1 Software-based Methods

First, we would like to propose two software-based meth-
ods to mitigate the side-channel attacks. We highlight that
these methods do not introduce hardware cost or alter the
conﬁguration of 3D printers.

• Dynamic Path Planning: To protect the 3D print-
ing design IP from training-based attack method, we
propose the dynamic path planning strategy. Gener-
ally, the operation models require an upfront training.
Therefore, to degrade the performance of the predic-
tion models, we adopt dynamic printing conﬁgurations
in the process of G-code generation. For example,
the printing speed for a speciﬁc material has a proper
speed range based on the material’s characteristic. Ap-
plying diﬀerent speed settings within the proper range
in the printing process will maintain the yield but re-
duce the attack accuracy. Diﬀerent temperature set-
tings in the nozzle heater are also be required to match
the printing speed and will further generate additional
interference in the side channels.

• Dummy Task Injection: As described in Section 5,
the successful deduction on nozzle status (print and
align) is determined by the nozzle speed. This model
is based on the convention that nozzle moves faster on
alignment than on printing. Based on this knowledge,
we can consider to inject additional dummy tasks on
purpose to spoof the sensors. Speciﬁcally, the dummy
task comprises a set of random trajectories with the
regular print speed yet no real material extrusion. The
dummy task can be integrated in the process of G-
code generation. This defense approach can increase

905the print duration while have little impact on the print
quality.

8.2 Hardware-supported Methods

Second, we discuss the hardware-supported methods to
reduce the IP theft risk. Generally, we need to prevent the
malicious attackers from collecting the valuable side-channel
information.

• Hardware Shielding: The most straightforward strat-
egy to limit the side-channel information emission is
to physically isolate the side-channel sources by hard-
ware shielding. There are a few oﬀ-the-shelf acoustic
and electromagnetic shielding materials [25, 21] which
are capable of eliminating the interference. However,
shielding hardware brings additional hardware cost to
the system and even decreases the operational usabil-
ity in daily use.

• Side Channel Interference: Another hardware-based
solution is to intentionally introduce more interference
to aﬀect the attacker’s sensors. Some home appli-
ances (e.g., refrigerators, air-conditioners) can gener-
ate strong electromagnetic interference (EMI) to dete-
riorate the side-channel quality. Moreover, a few re-
cent studies shows that sound noise can malfunction
the MEMS based sensors [32, 36], which are widely
used in smartphones. However, interference, such as
EMI and sound noise, might raise the potential health
concerns.

9. RELATED WORK

Understanding the vulnerability is the ﬁrst step to build
robust and resilient systems. As an emerging driving force
in manufacturing, security issues in 3D printing have been
raised in the past few years. As aforementioned, 3D print-
ing chain involves both cyber-domain process and physical
domain process. Since 2014, people start to investigate cy-
ber vulnerabilities in the 3D printing chain. For example,
Sturm et al.
[38] examined speciﬁc malwares to conduct
certain malicious operations to the digital ﬁles in the cy-
ber domain and proved that the product yield was aﬀected.
Wells et al. [41] identiﬁed the issue of cyber vulnerability by
designing malicious software to infect, modify or steal STL
ﬁles or tool-path ﬁles.

On the contrary, physical attacks in the 3D printing chain
remain underexplored. Backes et al.
[14] inspected the
acoustic emanations of dot matrix printers. They presented
a side-channel attack method to recover what a dot matrix
2D printer is printing based on the sound record. Al Faruque
et al. [12] demonstrated the acoustic side-channel attack on
3D printing. However, they only considered the cases with
single contour instead of multiple ones. Moreover, both work
employed professional audio equipment in the attacking ap-
proaches. 3D scanning [20, 27] is another technology to re-
construct the digital three-dimensional model by creating a
point cloud of geometric samples on the surface of the ob-
ject. Yet this technology is not capable of inner structure
detection and the scanner, such as Matter And Form 3D
scanner [3], still remains expensive. Also, 3D scanning at-
tack requires the physical access to the 3D objects.

In the era of smart devices and internet of things, phys-
ical domain attacks leveraging cost-eﬃcient and ubiquitous
sensors deserve more attentions.

10. CONCLUSION

3D printing has been hailed as the third industrial revo-
lution in the unique way that products are conceived, de-
signed, manufactured and distributed to end users. How-
ever, there are still many security unknowns about using
3D printers in daily life, which might impose the poten-
tial risk on applied ﬁelds or hinder its applicability to more
IP-sensitive industries.
In this paper, we made the ﬁrst
step to understand the potential vulnerability in the 3D
printing process in daily life. Speciﬁcally, we presented a
smartphone-based side-channel attack that takes inputs of
magnetic and acoustic emanations in the 3D printing pro-
cess, and reconstructed the design object with high accuracy
in regular and complex design inference. As demonstrated
in our study, the IP attack is easy to launch and we discuss
several approaches to mitigate the risk. We hope that the
ﬁnding of this study can serve as the reference to understand
and protect the 3D printer systems.

11. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank our shepherd Christina Poepper and the anony-
mous reviewers for their insightful comments on this paper.
This work was in part supported by National Science Foun-
dation grants CNS-1421903 and CNS-1547167.

12. REFERENCES
[1] Google Nexus 5 Smartphone.

https://www.google.com/nexus/5/.

[2] MakerBot Replicator. https://www.makerbot.com/?
[3] Matter And Form 3D Scanner.

https://matterandform.net/scanner.

[4] Weka Machine Learning Toolkit.

http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/.

[5] 3D Printing Stringing Eﬀect. 2015.

https://ultimaker.com/en/resources/19504-stringing.
[6] Asahi Kasei 3D Magnetometer Sensor AK8963. 2015.

http://www.akm.com/akm/en/product/datasheet1/
?partno=AK8963.

[7] InvenSense MPU6515 6-Axis Accelerometer and

Gyroscope. 2015. https://www.chipworks.com/TOC/
InvenSense MPU-6515 6-Axis Accelerometer
Gyroscope FAR-1401-901 TOC.pdf.

[8] Qualcomm WCD9320 audio codec. 2015.

https://developer.qualcomm.com/download/sd600/
wcd9311-audio-codec-device-speciﬁcation.pdf.

[9] Ultimaker 3D Printer. 2015.

https://ultimaker.com/en/products/ultimaker-2-go.

[10] Zoom H6 Handy Recorder. 2015.

http://www.zoom-na.com.

[11] G-code (RS-274). First edition in 1950s.

http://reprap.org/wiki/G-code.

[12] M. A. Al Faruque, S. R. Chhetri, A. Canedo, and
J. Wan. Acoustic side-channel attacks on additive
manufacturing systems. In Proceedings of the
ACM/IEEE Sixth International Conference on
Cyber-Physical Systems. ACM, 2016.

[13] P. Anderson and C. A. Sherman. A discussion of new
business models for 3d printing. International Journal
of Technology Marketing, 2(3):280–294, 2007.

[14] M. Backes, M. D¨urmuth, S. Gerling, M. Pinkal, and

C. Sporleder. Acoustic side-channel attacks on

906printers. In USENIX Security Symposium, pages
307–322, 2010.

[29] H. R. D. Market. Global industry analysis, size, share,

growth, trends and forecast, 2013–2019, 2014.

[15] D. Bak. 3D System Solutions. Assem. Autom, 2004.

[30] J. H. Martin and D. Jurafsky. Speech and language

http://www.3dsystems.com/solutions/overview.

processing. International Edition, 2000.

[16] T. Chai and R. R. Draxler. Root mean square error

[31] P. Mermelstein. Distance measures for speech

(rmse) or mean absolute error (mae)?–arguments
against avoiding rmse in the literature. Geoscientiﬁc
Model Development, 7(3):1247–1250, 2014.

recognition, psychological and instrumental. Pattern
recognition and artiﬁcial intelligence, 116:374–388,
1976.

[17] G. A. Fielding, A. Bandyopadhyay, and S. Bose.

[32] Y. Michalevsky, D. Boneh, and G. Nakibly.

Eﬀects of silica and zinc oxide doping on mechanical
and biological properties of 3d printed tricalcium
phosphate tissue engineering scaﬀolds. Dental
Materials, 28(2):113–122, 2012.

Gyrophone: Recognizing speech from gyroscope
signals. In 23rd USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 14), pages 1053–1067, 2014.

[33] B. Rosenfeld. A history of non-euclidean geometry.

[18] W. R. Hamilton. Ii. on quaternions; or on a new

1988.

system of imaginaries in algebra. The London,
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and
Journal of Science, 25(163):10–13, 1844.

[19] J.-U. Hou, D.-G. Kim, S. Choi, and H.-K. Lee. 3d

print-scan resilient watermarking using a
histogram-based circular shift coding structure. In
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Information
Hiding and Multimedia Security, pages 115–121. ACM,
2015.

[20] A. Karasik and U. Smilansky. 3d scanning technology
as a standard archaeological tool for pottery analysis:
practice and theory. Journal of Archaeological Science,
35(5):1148–1168, 2008.

[21] K&J Magnetic Inc. Mag Shielding Materials.

https://www.kjmagnetics.com/.

[34] A. Savitzky and M. J. Golay. Smoothing and

diﬀerentiation of data by simpliﬁed least squares
procedures. Analytical chemistry, 36(8):1627–1639,
1964.

[35] G. Shakhnarovich, L. Lee, and T. Darrell. Integrated

face and gait recognition from multiple views. In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2001.
CVPR 2001. Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer
Society Conference on, volume 1, pages I–439. IEEE,
2001.

[36] Y. Son, H. Shin, D. Kim, Y. Park, J. Noh, K. Choi,

J. Choi, and Y. Kim. Rocking drones with intentional
sound noise on gyroscopic sensors. In 24th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 15), pages
881–896, 2015.

[22] J. B. Kuipers et al. Quaternions and rotation

[37] S.-J. Song, J. Choi, Y.-D. Park, S. Hong, J. J. Lee,

sequences, volume 66. Princeton university press
Princeton, 1999.

[23] C. Y.-K. Lai and P. Aarabi. Multiple-microphone

time-varying ﬁlters for robust speech recognition. In
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2004.
Proceedings.(ICASSP’04). IEEE International
Conference on, volume 1, pages I–233. IEEE, 2004.
[24] T. Lambrou, P. Kudumakis, R. Speller, M. Sandler,
and A. Linney. Classiﬁcation of audio signals using
statistical features on time and wavelet transform
domains. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,
1998. Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International
Conference on, volume 6, pages 3621–3624. IEEE,
1998.

[25] LESSEMF Inc. Shielding Fabrics.

http://www.lessemf.com/fabric.html.

[26] B. Leukers, H. G¨ulkan, S. H. Irsen, S. Milz, C. Tille,

M. Schieker, and H. Seitz. Hydroxyapatite scaﬀolds for
bone tissue engineering made by 3d printing. Journal
of Materials Science: Materials in Medicine,
16(12):1121–1124, 2005.

[27] M. Levoy, K. Pulli, B. Curless, S. Rusinkiewicz,
D. Koller, L. Pereira, M. Ginzton, S. Anderson,
J. Davis, J. Ginsberg, et al. The digital michelangelo
project: 3d scanning of large statues. In Proceedings of
the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics and
interactive techniques, pages 131–144. ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 2000.

[28] Y. Liao, H. Li, and Y. Chiu. Study of laminated

object manufacturing with separately applied heating
and pressing. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 27(7-8):703–707, 2006.

C. B. Ahn, H. Choi, and K. Sun. Sodium alginate
hydrogel-based bioprinting using a novel multinozzle
bioprinting system. Artiﬁcial organs,
35(11):1132–1136, 2011.

[38] L. Sturm, C. Williams, J. Camelio, J. White, and

R. Parker. Cyber-physical vunerabilities in additive
manufacturing systems. Context, 7:8, 2014.

[39] J. Thilmany. Printed life. Mechanical engineering,

134(1):44, 2012.

[40] W.-H. Tsai, Y.-M. Tu, and C.-H. Ma. An ﬀt-based

fast melody comparison method for
query-by-singing/humming systems. Pattern
Recognition Letters, 33(16):2285–2291, 2012.

[41] L. J. Wells, J. A. Camelio, C. B. Williams, and
J. White. Cyber-physical security challenges in
manufacturing systems. Manufacturing Letters,
2(2):74–77, 2014.

[42] T. Wohlers. Wohlers report 2015: 3D Printing and

Additive Manufacturing State of the Industry. Wohlers
Associates, 2015.

[43] H. Zhao and Z. Wang. Motion measurement using

inertial sensors, ultrasonic sensors, and magnetometers
with extended kalman ﬁlter for data fusion. Sensors
Journal, IEEE, 12(5):943–953, 2012.

[44] E. Zwyssig, F. Faubel, S. Renals, and M. Lincoln.

Recognition of overlapping speech using digital MEMS
microphone arrays. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 7068–7072. IEEE, 2013.

907