Control-Alt-Hack: The Design and Evaluation of a Card 
Game for Computer Security Awareness and Education 

Tamara Denning†, Adam Lerner†, Adam Shostack*, and Tadayoshi Kohno†

†

Computer Science & Engineering 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA, USA 

{tdenning, lerner, yoshi}@cs.washington.edu 

*adam@homeport.org 

 

ABSTRACT 
We  scoped,  designed,  produced,  and  evaluated  the  effectiveness 
of  a  recreational  tabletop  card  game  created  to  raise  awareness 
of—and  alter  perceptions  regarding—computer  security.  We 
discuss  our  process,  the  challenges  that  arose,  and  the  decisions 
we  made  to  address  those  challenges.  As  of  May  2013,  we  have 
shipped  approximately  800  free  copies  to  150  educators.  We 
analyze and report on feedback from 22 of these educators about 
their  experiences  using  Control-Alt-Hack  with  over  450  students 
in classroom and non-classroom contexts. The responses from the 
14 educators who reported on their use of the game in a classroom 
context  variously  indicated  that:  their  students’  awareness  of 
computer  security  as  a  complex  and  interesting  field  was 
increased  (11/14);  they  would  use  the  game  again  in  their 
classroom (10/14); and they would recommend the game to others 
(13/14).  Of  note,  2  of  the  14  classroom  educators  reported  that 
they would not have otherwise covered the material. Additionally, 
we present results from user studies with 11 individuals and find 
that  their  responses  indicate  that  8  of  the  11  had  an  increased 
awareness  of  computer  security  or  a  changed  perception; 
furthermore,  all  of  our  intended  goals  are  touched  upon  in  their 
responses.    

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2  [COMPUTERS  AND  EDUCATION]:  Computer  and 
Information Science Education 

Keywords 
Card  game;  computer  science  education;  computer  security  and 
privacy;  computer  security  education;  game;  outreach;  privacy; 
security; 
security 
outreach; tabletop security; tabletop games. 

security  awareness; 

security  education; 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
We  believe  that  there  is  vast  benefit  to  be  offered  from  raising 
people’s  awareness  of  computer  security.  Exposing  many 
different kinds of individuals to ideas that make them think about 
computer  security—however  briefly—could  potentially  benefit 
the status of computer security as whole: 

Current and Future Users. The more people prioritize security, 
the  more  they  might  express  it  with  their  purchasing  power,  and 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the  full citation on  the  first page. Copyrights  for  components of  this  work owned 
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. 
To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions  from 
permissions@acm.org. 
CCS’13, November 4–8, 2013, Berlin, Germany. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-2477-9/13/11…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2508859.2516753  

the more willing they might be to engage in security and privacy 
behaviors that require time or effort. 

Current and Future Developers. The more developers prioritize 
security, the more willing they might be to take action. This might 
mean  taking  security  training,  refreshing  their  knowledge  of  best 
security  practices,  taking  more  care  with  their  code,  or  simply 
thinking to reach out to their institution’s security team.  

Current  and  Future  Management.  If  management  prioritizes 
security,  they  might  dedicate  more  resources  to  developing  and 
maintaining  secure  products  and  systems,  or  reward  security-
promoting behaviors via the institution’s incentive structure. 

Future Technologists. We encourage as many people as possible 
to  consider  computer  security  and  computer  science  as  a 
profession, in order to increase the strength of the field as a whole. 

There  are  many  avenues  to  increase  people’s  awareness  of 
security:  publicity  campaigns,  integration  into  popular  culture, 
and education and training are just a few. In our work, our desire 
to create an artifact that exposes people to thinking about security 
and  that  facilitates  ad  hoc,  social  interactions  led  us  to  design 
Control-Alt-Hack®:  White  Hat  Hacking  for  Fun  and  Profit:  a 
recreational,  tabletop  card  game  about  computer  security.  As  of 
May  2013,  approximately  800  requested  copies  of  Control-Alt-
Hack have been shipped to 150 educators.  

We  sent  these  educators  surveys,  and  22  educators  representing 
over  450  students  submitted  feedback  about  their  experiences 
using  Control-Alt-Hack  inside  and  outside  of  the  classroom. 
Analysis  of  the  evaluation  data  has  indicated  that  we  have  had 
some  success  meeting  our  design  goals.  Of  the  educators  who 
reported  using  the  game  in  their  classrooms:  11  out  of  14 
indicated  in  their  responses  that  the  game  played  a  role  in 
increasing their students’ awareness of computer security; 11 out 
of 14 indicated that the game was engaging or filled a social role 
in  the  classroom;  13  out  of  14  indicated  that  they  would  suggest 
the game to others; and 10 out of 14 said that they would use the 
game in their class again. In terms of reaching new audiences, 2 of 
the  classroom  educators  reported  that  they  would  not  have 
otherwise  covered  the  security  material  in  Control-Alt-Hack. 
Furthermore, in a user study we conducted with 11 participants, 8 
of the 11 provided evidence that they were thinking in new ways 
about computer security after playing the game. 

In this paper, we: 

  Describe  and  explore  the  manner  in  which  unconventional 
tools,  and  specifically  a  physical  game,  can  reach  new 
audiences—or  be  used  in  new  contexts—in  order  to  raise 
overall awareness or alter perceptions about security; 

915with  one  or  more  of  the  characters  in  order  to  envision 
themselves in the field. 

(2)  To  highlight  the  variety  of  professional  and  personal 

opportunities available to people with these skills. 

Exposure  Goal.  We  seek  to  have  as  wide  an  impact  with  our 
Awareness  and  Perception  Goals  as  possible—the  more  people 
that  play  this  game,  the  more  opportunities  our  game  has  to 
increase awareness or change perception.  

2.2  Why a Game? 
We believe that games are well positioned to address our specific 
project  goals.  If  designed  well,  we  argue  that  games  can  be  an 
appropriate  tool  for  seeding  a  large  audience  of  people  with  a 
modest amount of security information. Briefly: 

  Games can be fun, which gets people engaged. 

 

Figure 1. A photo of the game box and contents.  

Photo Credit: Juliet Fiss. © University of Washington  

  Games  can  give  you  permission  to  explore  ideas  and  ask 

 

 

 

Explicate and critique our design process, the constraints that 
arose throughout its course, and the tradeoffs that we made to 
further our project goals; 

Present  our  analysis  evaluating  the  success  of  our  tool  in 
reaching  its  desired  audience  and  achieving  its  intended 
goals; 

  Based  on  our  knowledge  and  our  evaluation,  discuss  the 
contexts in which the game is less suitable, and our takeaway 
lessons  regarding  how  this  reflects  the  design  tradeoffs  that 
we made to meet our goals; 

  Contribute  to  the  knowledge  foundation  for  those  interested 
in creating tools that utilize unconventional methods or reach 
new  audiences,  in  order  to  ultimately  improve  the  state  of 
computer security as a whole.  

2.  PROJECT GOALS 
2.1  Goals 
Awareness Goals. As motivated by Section 1, our primary goal is 
to  increase  people’s  awareness  of  computer  security  needs  and 
challenges, so that they can be more informed technology builders 
and consumers. This includes: 

(1)  Increasing  understanding  of  the  importance  of  computer 
security,  and  the  potential  risks  with  inadequate  security 
safeguards. 

is  relevant, 

(2)  Conveying  the  breadth  of  technologies  for  which  computer 
security 
including  not  only  conventional 
computing  platforms  like  laptops  and  Web  servers,  but  also 
emerging  platforms  like  pervasive  technologies  and  cyber-
physical systems. 

(3)  Improving understanding of the diversity of potential threats 
that  security  designers  must  consider  and  the  creativity  of 
attackers. 

the 

information 

that 

Perception  Goals  (Secondary  Goal).  We  additionally  seek  to 
show 
its 
professions are open to people of diverse backgrounds. Providing 
even  fictional  role-models  could  help  encourage  interest  in 
computer  science  and  computer  security.  More  specifically,  we 
aim:  

technology  community  and 

(1)  To  work  against  negative,  dissuasive,  or  niche  stereotypes 
about people in these fields, and to allow players to identify 

questions. 

  Games  are  intended  to  have  intrinsic  entertainment  value, 
which gets people to pick them up and use them on their own 
time. 

 

Given  the  subject  matter,  it  may  seem  natural  to  have  created  a 
computer  game,  rather  than  a  physical  tabletop  game.  Both 
formats have their merits and their limitations, and in creating our 
tool we chose to explore  the  problem space via a  physical  game. 
Part  of  our reasoning  in  doing  so was to  take  advantage  of some 
of the following factors: 

 

Physical  games  may  appeal  to  people  who  do  not  enjoy 
computer games. 

  Aside  from  requiring  a  surface  on  which  to  play,  physical 
games  generally  do  not  require  extensive  setup  or  have 
resource dependencies. 

  Having a game lying around in a physical space provides the 
opportunity  to  read  through  some  of  the  cards,  even  if  the 
game is not being actively played.  

While  the  following  properties  are  not  exclusive  to  physical 
games: 

 

Physical  games  can  create  social  environments,  which  can 
foster interaction and discussion of ideas encountered. 

  Because  physical  games  can  create  interaction  between 

players, they are suitable for use in social gatherings.  

2.3  Target Audience 
No game strongly appeals to everyone. While we sought to make 
our  game  as  broadly  appealing  as  possible  to  raise  security 
awareness  within  a  very  large  audience,  it  is  most  practical  to 
target a specific demographic.  

Primary  Education  Audience.  Our  primary  target  audience  is 
people with an affinity for computer science and engineering but 
without 
requiring  significant  computer  security  education, 
training, or experience. We target in particular those who are early 
in  their  careers,  including  computer  science  and  engineering 
undergraduate  students,  high  school  students,  and 
recent 
graduates.  For  example,  a  high  school  student  in  AP  Computer 
Science  might  play  this  game, as  might  a  recent  hire  in  software 
development,  test,  or  management.  This  goal  means  that  our 
primary  target  audience  is  technically  inclined  and  consists  of 
roughly 15- to 30-year-olds. 

Secondary  Education  Audiences:  High 
and 
undergraduate  students  in  the  Science,  Technology,  Engineering, 

school 

916 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. The character art from the portrait side of 12 of the game’s 16 Hacker cards. © University of Washington 

 

and  Math  (STEM)  disciplines;  software  developers;  gamers;  and 
the broader public. 

Security Community: As a vector for increased dissemination. 

3.  GAME DESIGN 
In  this  section  we  give  a  brief,  high-level  tour  of  our  game 
development process. 

3.1  Choosing Game Mechanics 
A game’s “mechanics” includes all numeric and logical elements 
of  the  game  that  contribute  to  game  play;  for  example,  a  game’s 
mechanics might consist of its rules, the number and type of game 
decks, and the numbers or gameplay actions on those cards. It can 
be  challenging  to  design  mechanics  that  lead  to  well-balanced 
games. Variables include: the number of players; the time it takes 
to  learn  the  rules;  the  time  it  takes  to  play;  replay  value; 
cooperative  versus  competitive  paradigms;  the  ability  to  rebound 
from  a  losing  streak;  and  the  variety  of  winning  strategies.  The 
story, flavor text, and art rest on top of the mechanics. 

We  initially  explored  creating  game  mechanics  from  scratch.  
However,  since  we  are  computer  security  researchers  and  not 
experts in  game mechanics, we chose to  license a  system from  a 
pre-existing  game  and  then  create  all  new  game  content.  This 
approach  allowed  us  to  forgo  playtesting  the  mechanics—a 
necessary,  time-consuming  step  to  ensure  game  balance  and 
enjoyment.  We  did  do  playtesting  to  review  our  game  content, 
which we discuss in Section 3.2. 

We  explored  the  rules  and  mechanics  of  a  number  of  games 
available for sale in gaming stores for a game that would support 
our desired design goals. For example, we wanted a game where a 
player took on the role of a character, so that they could identify 
with  someone  in  the  computer  security  field  (Perception  Goals); 
we  immediately  gravitated  towards  games  whose  characters 
featured  a  variety  of  skills,  in  order  to  highlight  the  somewhat 
eclectic  specializations  that  can  help  improve—or  break—a 
system’s  security.  We  also  wanted  a  game  that  would  naturally 
support a variety of textually-heavy scenarios or encounters. 

We  licensed  the  Ninja  Burger  mechanic  from  Steve  Jackson 
Games  [28],  best  known  for  their  Munchkin  card  game  and  the 
GURPS roleplaying system. Ninja Burger met our above criteria, 
and  we  transformed  the  game  into  Control-Alt-Hack:  White  Hat 
Hacking  for  Fun  and  Profit.  Instead  of  delivering  burgers  in  fun 
scenarios  in  the  quest  to  become  the  next  branch  manager,  our 
players  tackle  a  range  of  technically-themed  scenarios  with  the 
goal of becoming the next company CEO.  

3.2  Feedback Process 
We solicited feedback on iterations of the  Control-Alt-Hack card 
deck  to  gather  suggestions  to  improve  the  game  and  assess  its 
ability  to  meet  our  goals.  These  formative  evaluations  took  the 
form  of  playtest  sessions  or  “show  and  tell”  sessions,  and  were 
conducted  with  a  variety  of  parties,  including:  undergraduates  in 
an  introductory  computer  science  course  (n=10);  undergraduates 
involved  in  a  computer  security  competition  (n=5);  graduate 
students  affiliated  with  a  computer  security  lab  (n=8);  graduate 
students (unaffiliated with a security lab) who have an interest in 
gaming  (n=2);  computer  science  professors  (n=2);  a  computer 
science  lecturer  (n=1);  a  former  high  school  teacher  of  computer 
science,  now  an  undergraduate  lecturer  (n=1);  outreach  officers 
(n=3);  and  assorted  non-experts  (n=14).  In  response  to  this 
evaluation feedback, we: changed specific card text, modified art, 
and added new cards to help keep track of gameplay decisions. 

3.3  Brief Overview of Control-Alt-Hack 
The following is the premise of the game: 

You and your fellow players work for Hackers, Inc.: a small, 
elite computer security company of ethical (a.k.a., white hat) 
hackers who perform security audits and provide consultation 
services. Their motto? “You Pay Us to Hack You.” 

Your job is centered around Missions—tasks that require you 
to  apply  your  hacker  skills  (and  a  bit  of  luck)  in  order  to 
succeed.  Use  your  Social  Engineering  and  Network  Ninja 
skills  to  break  the  region’s  power  grid,  or  apply  a  bit  of 
Hardware  Hacking  and  Software  Wizardry  to  convert  your 

917 

 

 

 

Figure 3. From left to right: (a) a Mission demonstrating the usage of technical skills for artistic purposes (Perception Goal (2)); 

(b) a Bag of Tricks card illustrating a particular attack threat (Awareness Goal (3)); and (c) a Mission describing a social 

engineering attack on an SCADA system (Awareness Goals (2) & (3)), along with the mappings to the original Ninja Burger card. 

© University of Washington 

robotic  vacuum  cleaner  into  an  interactive  pet  toy...no  two 
jobs are the same. So pick up the dice, and get hacking! 

enjoyability, we intentionally did not want all of the cards to focus 
on computer security topics. 

Figure 1 shows the game box and contents. Figures 2 and 3 show 
some of the game art and card contents.  

Each turn each player attempts a single Mission, so players get to 
see a number of Missions throughout the course of the game. By 
incorporating a large number of technologies and security threats 
into the Mission narratives, we communicate a variety of security 
ideas throughout the course of the game. 

3.4  Juggling Design Constraints  
Our  game  creation  process  was  driven  by  goals  and  constraints, 
some occasionally in direct conflict; seeking optimal solutions (or 
pleasing compromises) took significant effort and iteration. 

3.4.1  Text 
In  creating  the  cards’  textual  content,  we  balanced  a  number  of 
goals  and  restrictions:  (1)  Including  Technical  Content;  (2) 
Mapping  Game  Mechanics;  (3)  Offering  Comprehensibility;  (4) 
Maintaining Brevity; and (5) Incorporating Humor. 

Including Technical Content. We began by creating a list of the 
content  we  wanted  to  cover  in  order  to  address  our  Awareness 
Goals  and  convey  the  range  and  depth  of  computer  security 
issues:  we  brainstormed  lists  of  technologies,  attacks,  defenses, 
attacker types, and the range of human assets that can be impacted 
by system breaches. Table 7 in the Appendix (Section A.1) gives 
some  sample  card  titles  and  topics,  along  with  examples  of 
specific  research  that  inspired  their  inclusion.  We  sought  topics 
that would be relevant and interesting to players through personal 
(e.g.,  social  networks),  educational  (e.g.,  browser  cookies),  or 
professional  experience  (e.g.,  patching)  or  through  the  news  and 
media  (e.g.,  credit  card  theft).  During  the  Feedback  Process 
(Section 3.2), we solicited feedback on the selection and technical 
accuracy of the content which we portrayed. 

Most of the game relates to computer security: of the 56 Mission 
cards,  44  deal  directly  with  security  topics,  6  with  technological 
activities (as in Figure 3a), and the remaining 6 deal with related 
topics like puzzles, the role of computer security in history, or the 
value  of  professional  networking.  For  content  balance  and 

Mapping Game Mechanics. The  characters, their skills, and  the 
Missions—which require the use of various combinations of those 
skills—in  Control-Alt-Hack  are  isomorphic  to  those  in  Ninja 
Burger  in  order  to  preserve  game  balance.  Significant  iteration 
and exploration was required to create reasonably realistic and fun 
story  justifications  for  the  combinations  of  skills  required  for  all 
56 Missions. See the Mission “Shock Value” in Figure 3(c) for an 
example  where  it  was  necessary  to  invent  an  attack  requiring 
Social  Engineering  and  Network  Ninja  skills,  along  with  a 
mapping  from  the  original  Ninja  Burger  card.  Similar  effort  was 
required to create content for the game’s 72 Entropy cards and 16 
Hacker cards. 

Offering Comprehensibility. Given our target audience (Section 
2.3),  our  goal  of  creating  enthusiasm  for  computer  security  and 
computer  science  (Perception  Goals),  and  our  desire  to  reach  a 
broad  audience  (Exposure  Goal),  we  needed  to  make  our  text 
understandable  to  those  without  extensive  security  experience—
without  sacrificing  technical  integrity.  We  attempted  to  always 
make  the  meaning  of  terms  implicitly  clear,  explicitly  clear,  or 
irrelevant  to  understanding  the  overall  gist  of  the  card.  For 
example, “Shock Value” in Figure 3(c) parenthetically defines an 
IP  address  as  an  Internet  address,  and  “Dumpster  Diving”  in 
Figure 3(b) defines dumpster diving within the text of the card.   

Observe how this latter card also incorporates additional learning 
content: the card helps illustrate that defensive measures (guards, 
in  this  case)  are  not  always  effective,  and  that  the  creativity  of 
attackers can be surprising (such as renting a garbage truck, which 
many people may not have thought possible). 

Incorporating Humor. We incorporated humor into the game in 
order  to  make  it  more  enjoyable.  The  humor  primarily  (but  not 
exclusively)  took  the  form  of:  (1)  puns;  (2)  popular  culture 
references; or (3) sexual innuendo, although we attempted to keep 
the  innuendo  tasteful  and  respectful,  and  we  evaluated  the  cards 
with stakeholder groups prior to finalizing them (Section 3.2). For 
example, “Shock Value” in Figure 4(c) has puns, and “eTextiles” 
in  Figure  3(a)  has  a  popular  culture  reference  in  its  Hardware 
Hacking task. 

918Responding 
Participant 

Course 

Class 
Size 

Student 
Level 

Prior Security Experience 

E1-classroom 

Information Software 
Technology 

E4-classroom  Unknown 

E6-classroom 

Computer Science 

E7-classroom 

Cyber-Security and 
Information Assurance 

E8-classroom 

Computer and Network 
Security 

30 

HS 

No / Some Informal 

12 

75 

56 

UG 

No / Some Informal 

HS 

Some Informal 

UG 

No / Some Informal 

Would have covered 
[the security material 
in Control-Alt-Hack] 
otherwise? 

Time 
Taken 

Supplementary 
assignment 
involving Control-
Alt-Hack 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

60 min 

No 

50 min 

Yes 

75 min 

No 

120 min 

Yes 

10 

UG, G 

Some Informal / Prior Educational 

Yes 

120 min 

No 

E9-classroom 

Computers and Information 
Technology 

60 

HS 

Prior Educational 

E10-classroom  Game Design 

E12-classroom  Computer Security 

E13-classroom 

IT Security 

E14-classroom 

Information Security 

E16-classroom 

Intro CS Web Design 

E17-classroom  Cyber Security 

65 

22 

8 

15 

35 

2 

E18-classroom  Fundamentals of Information 

30 

Security 

HS 

UG 

UG 

UG 

HS 

HS 

UG 

No / Some Informal 

Prior Educational 

Prior Educational 

Some Informal / Prior Educational 

No 

Prior Educational 

No / Some Informal / Prior Educational / 
Prior Professional 

E19-classroom  Computer and Network 

27 

UG 

No / Some Informal 

Security 

No 

Yes 

No* 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

75 min 

No 

90 min 

Yes 

80 min 

Yes 

45 min 

No 

120 min 

No 

40 min 

30 min 

No 

No 

75 min 

Yes 

60 min 

No 

Table 1. Classroom-based educator activity contexts. The shaded cells represent cases of interest, some of which are discussed in 

Sections 6.4 and A.4. HS = high school; UG = undergraduate; G = graduate.  

*We believe this response to be an error or a misinterpretation of the question’s meaning. 

 

3.4.2  Visuals 
We directed illustration and graphic design as part of the game’s 
content  creation  process.  We  purposefully  allocated  a  non-trivial 
portion  of  our  resources  to  these  visuals  for  two  reasons:  (a)  to 
make it easier for players to identify with and project themselves 
onto  Hacker  characters  (Perception  Goals);  and  (b)  to  make  the 
game  visually  appealing,  hopefully  attracting  players  (Exposure 

Table 2. Non-classroom-based educator activity contexts 

 

Context 

E2-ACM 

E3-vetting 

E5-no-play* 

E11-checkout 

E15-vetting 

Extra-curricular activity with 
undergrads in the ACM 

University instructors vetting the 
game 
University Instructors 
Instructor vetting the game with adult 
friends* 

Provided as a checkout for students 
to play with friend and family 

150 
min 

Instructor vetting with graduate 
students, faculty, and staff 

E20-vetting-didn’t-read** 

Instructor vetting** 

E21-lunch 

Departmental staff lunch 

E22-vetting 

Instructor vetting 

*After reading the rules, they did not understand how to play, so they stopped. 

**The instructor chose not to read cards or play due to the list of PG-14 cards 

supplied on the web site. 

 

Time 
Taken 

150 
min 

150 
min 

N/A* 

60 min 

N/A** 

60 min 

90 min 

Goal) and implicitly showing that a focus on technology does not 
preclude placing importance on aesthetics (Perception Goals). 

In  creating  Hacker  portraits,  we  addressed  the  Perception  and 
Exposure  Goals  by  balancing  the  characters’  genders  and 
ethnicities and by showing them engaging in a variety of hobbies. 
Figure 2 shows the character art from the portrait side of 12 of the 
16 Hacker cards.  

4.  DISTRIBUTION, EXPOSURE, AND 
PRELIMINARY IMPACT  
In order to  reach a  diverse set  of audiences (Exposure Goal), we 
chose  to  make  Control-Alt-Hack  available  via  two  different 
avenues: 

(1)  Available  for  free  to  educators  who  submit  a  request  via 
http://www.controlalthack.com.  As  of  July  2013,  the  supply 
of games allocated to educators has been nearly depleted. 

(2)  Available  for  sale  on  Amazon.com  via  RGB  Hats,  LLC, 
which  was  founded  by  two  of  the  co-authors  and  which 
licensed  the  game  from  the  University  of  Washington.  This 
distribution method also allows production of the game to be 
self-sustaining. 

 

From  when  the  game  was  made  available  in  November  through 
March, we shipped approximately 800 copies of the game to 150 
different  educators  who  requested  copies.  Approximately  50 
copies were also handed out  at the SIGCSE  2013 poster  session. 
Together,  these  educators  served  as  the  recruitment  pool  for  our 
summative evaluation of the game (Section 6). Additionally, over 

919Positive Functions 

 

 

Social / Engagement 

Awareness 

Critiques 

Takes a long 
time to learn 

Takes a long 
time to play 

Not enough 
educational 

Not enough fun 

value 

Has 

inappropriate 

content 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X 

X 

X 

 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

X  

X 

X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

E1-classroom 

E4-classroom 

E6-classroom 

E7-classroom 

E8-classroom 

E9-classroom 

E10-classroom 

E12-classroom 

E13-classroom 

E14-classroom 

E16-classroom 

E17-classroom 

 

E18-classroom 

E19-classroom 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 

X 

X 

 

X 

X 

 
 

 
 

 
 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

X 

X  

X 

X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 3. Classroom-based educator survey analysis results. 

 
300  copies  have  been  distributed  at  a  variety  of  NSF-sponsored 
job fairs, competitions, and similar events.  

We  were  invited  to  present  a  talk  on  the  game  at  a  large  web 
company’s  internal  security  training  conference,  and  an  optional 
play session was held at the conclusion of the hands-on training. 

5.  EVALUATION METHOD 
In this paper we present evaluations of Control-Alt-Hack via two 
methods:  

 

 

Primary:  Feedback  surveys  from  educators  who  requested 
copies of the game; and  

Secondary: User studies performed with the game. 

Both  methods  were  approved  by  the  University  of  Washington’s 
Human Subjects Institutional Review Board. 

5.1  Educator Feedback Surveys 
We  distributed  online  feedback  surveys  via  email  to  the  150 
instructors  who  received  educator  copies  prior  to  May  2013. 
Section  A.2  in  the  Appendix  shows  the  questions  asked  on  the 
educator survey. 22 educators submitted responses to the surveys.  

to 

researchers  analyzed 

the  survey 

this  coding  scheme. 

responses 
Coding.  Two 
independently  and  formed  preliminary  opinions  about 
the 
categories  that  emerged  from  the  data.  The  researchers  then 
compared  the  categories  and  formed  a  cohesive  coding  scheme 
via  consensus.  The  primary  coder  recoded  the  educator  surveys 
according 
(Complying  with  our 
institution’s conflict management plan, one of the researchers has 
no  financial  interest  in  RGB  Hats,  LLC.)  In  the  evaluation,  we 
used  the  survey  in  its  entirety  as  the  unit  of  analysis,  rather  than 
individual  responses;  that  is  to  say,  if  part  of  an  educator’s 
response received the code “Awareness,” it did not  matter which 
question  on  the  survey  elicited  the  relevant  response,  and  it  did 
not  matter  how  many 
the  survey  was  coded  for 
“Awareness.” 

times 

The  primary  coder  and  the  secondary  coder  had  93%  agreement 
across  all  educator  surveys  (N=22)  and  codes  (N=7);  there  were 
11 cases where the primary and the reliability coder disagreed. All 
cases  are  provided  in  the  Appendix  (Section  A.3),  along  with 
contextual  quotes.  Except  for  one  case  in  which  the  reliability 
coder  misread  the  data  and  coded  an  error,  the  primary  coder’s 
results—the  results  reported  in  the  paper—always  represent  the 
stricter of the two viewpoints. That is, we report the upper bound 
on  our  interpretation  of  the  critiques  to  the  game  and  the  lower 
bound on the game’s role in engagement and awareness. 

The primary and secondary coders independently labeled educator 
activities  as  classroom-based  or  non-classroom-based  activities; 
they  had  100%  agreement.  Tables  1  and  2  list  information  about 
classroom- and non-classroom-based activities, respectively.  

5.2  User Studies 
We  posted  recruitment  ads  inviting  participants  to  join  us  for  a 
games  study  session  on:  an  institution-wide  electronic  bulletin 
board; and in the local Craigslist gigs listings. We held two game 
study  sessions:  one  with  7  people  (M=3,  F=4)  divided  into  two 
gameplay  groups;  and  one  with  4  people  in  one  gameplay  group 
(M=1, F=3). The participants covered a range of ages (mean=31, 
min=18,  max=50,  median=29).  5  of  the  participants  could  be 
categorized  as  “hobbyist”  gamers,  and  6  had  casual  or  little 
gaming  experience.  Each  session  lasted  approximately  2  hours. 
Participants  were  compensated  $20  for  their  time.  Following 
consent  paperwork,  participants  filled  out  a  short  pre-gameplay 
survey.  After  this  participants  were  shown  a  15-minute  video 
introducing  them  to  gameplay;  we  used  a  video  for  consistency 
between  sessions.  Participants  played  for  40-60  minutes,  then 
filled out a short post-gameplay questionnaire. 

Coding.  Two  researchers  independently  analyzed  the  survey 
responses  for  themes  and  categories.  (Complying  with  our 
institution’s conflict management plan, one of the researchers has 
no  financial  interest  in  RGB  Hats,  LLC.)  The  researchers 
discussed  and  came  to  a  consensus  regarding  the  data  of  interest 

920in the survey responses. The data in question is presented as direct 
quotations,  and  the  goal  mappings  were  decided  via  consensus 
coding.  

leave the game in the student lounge so they could continue 
to play, and from what I hear it’s made a trip or two out to 
our weekly majors night at the pub.” 

6.  EDUCATOR SURVEY RESULTS 
The 22 educators who responded to the survey used the game with 
over 450 students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate 
levels  in  computer  science,  computer  security,  and  game  design 
courses.  These  courses  were  primarily,  although  not  exclusively, 
based  in  the  United  States.  The  educator  survey  results  are  the 
primary evaluation of Control-Alt-Hack in this study. 

As  previously  mentioned,  the  educator  survey responses  fell  into 
one  of  two  categories:  feedback  about  an  activity  using  Control-
Alt-Hack  that  took  place  in  a  classroom,  or  feedback  about  an 
activity  using  Control-Alt-Hack  that  took  place  outside  of  a 
classroom.  Many  of  the  reported  non-classroom  activities  were 
from educators who were vetting the game for classroom use, and 
subsequently  decided  not  to  use  the  game;  the  other  non-
classroom activities were an ACM gathering, a lunch activity, and 
offering the game to students to check out and take home. Table 1 
provides  additional  information  on  the  classroom  activities 
(N=14), and  Table  2 provides additional information  on the  non-
classroom activities (N=8).  

6.1  Positive Functions 
Appreciation of the game expressed in educator surveys generally 
described the game as fulfilling one of two functions: being fun or 
serving  a  social  function  (Social/Engagement);  or  increasing 
students’  awareness  of  computer  security  or  computer  science 
issues (Awareness). 

Social/Engagement  (Classroom:  11/14;  Non-Classroom:  2/8). 
“Social/Engagement” was marked when the educator was deemed 
to be indicating that usage of the game was fun, engaging, and/or 
contributed  to  serve  a  social  function,  such  as  an  icebreaker  or  a 
breather before a test. The following quotes are two examples: 

  E7-classroom  (56  undergraduates,  Cyber-Security  and 
Information Awareness): “It worked as a way to break the 
ice  and  get  students  from  diverse  majors  get  to  know  [sic] 
each other and get thinking about the topics of the course.” 

  E19-classroom 

(27  undergraduates,  Computer  and 
Network Security): “I just wanted to reiterate how great my 
students  thought  the  game  was!  The  students  begged  me  to 

(Classroom: 

11/14;  Non-Classroom: 

1/8). 
Awareness 
“Awareness”  was  marked  when  the  educator  was  deemed  to  be 
indicating  that  usage  of  the  game  served  to  increase  students’ 
awareness  of  security  in  some  fashion,  such  as:  increasing 
exposure  to  domain  terminology;  raising  awareness  of  career 
opportunities;  stimulating  discussion;  or  stimulating  critical 
thinking. The following quotes are two examples: 

  E9-classroom  (60  high  school  students,  Computers  and 
Information  Technology):  “The  game  did  not  necessarily 
teach  security  methods,  but  it  did  a  great  job  of  teaching 
vocabulary  and  literacy.”…“It  increased  awareness  of  my 
program,  and  it  got  more  students  interested  in  computer 
science.” 

  E19-classroom 

(27  undergraduates,  Computer  and 
Network Security): “They really got into it and there was a 
lot of strategizing”…“They were mainly focused on causing 
pain to their classmates, but as I wandered around the room 
I  heard  some  great  discussions  about  the  tradeoffs  of 
choosing  various  hackers’  skill  sets,  what  various  missions 
meant, etc.” 

Table 3 shows the Positive Functions results from the classroom-
based educator responses, and Table 4 shows the results from the 
non-classroom-based educator responses.  

Overall,  in  the  classroom  contexts,  11  of  the  14  educators 
indicated  that  the  game  served  a  Social/Engagement  role,  and  a 
different  set  of  11  educators  indicated  that  the  game  served  to 
increase  Awareness.  For  the  educators  who  did  not  provide 
responses that indicated that the game raised awareness, two were 
courses  about  computer  security;  these  educators  also  indicated 
that  the  game  did  not  have  enough  educational  content  (Section 
6.2).  This  suggests  that  although  our  design  goals  were  aligned 
with  the  intentions  of  educators  not  already  teaching  a  computer 
security  course,  the  goals  were  not  well  aligned  with  some 
educators’  intentions  in  using  the  game  in  security-focused 
courses. 

In  the  non-classroom  contexts,  2  of  the  educators’  responses 
indicated  that  the  game  filled  a  Social/Engagement  role  (E2-
ACM,  E15-vetting),  and  1  of  the  educators  indicated  that  the 

Positive Functions 

Social / 

Engagement 

Awareness 

Critiques 

Takes a long 
time to learn 

Takes a long 
time to play 

Not enough fun 

X 

Table 4. Non-classroom-based educator survey analysis results. 

**The educator did not read the cards, but responded based on the list of PG-14 cards listed on the website.   

*Educator did not play the game due to not understanding the rules. 

 

 
 

E2-ACM 

E3-vetting 

E5-no-play* 

E11-checkout 

E15-vetting 

 

 

 

E20-vetting-didn’t-read**   

E21-lunch 

E22-vetting 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

X 

 

X 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

X 

X 

X 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Has 

inappropriate 

content 

 
 

N = 1 

X 

Not enough 
educational 

value 

 
 
X  

N = 5 

X 

 
 

 
 
 
 

X 

X 

X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

X 

X  

921game helped increase Awareness (E2-ACM). The relative lack of 
educators  reporting  positive  game  functions  in  non-classroom 
activities could be a result of the fact that many of the responses 
in the non-classroom context were from educators who played the 
game (or not, in 2 cases) out of the classroom in order to vet it for 
its suitability for use in the classroom. In many of those cases, the 
educator  decided  not  to  use  Control-Alt-Hack  in  the  classroom 
(Section 6.3  and Table  5), so it is not  surprising that they do not 
comment that the game serves positive functions. 

6.1.1  Discussion 
Overall,  we  find  that  the  feedback  on  the  game—in  the 
classrooms  in  which  it  was  used—shows  promising  indications 
that it performs multiple positive functions. 

Awareness.  In  most  of  the  surveys,  educators’  comments 
indicated that the game helped raise students’ awareness of issues 
related  to  computer  security.  Raising  individuals’  awareness  of 
the  risks,  challenges,  technologies,  and  professions  involved  in 
computer security was a large part of our purpose in creating the 
game (Goals, Section 2.1). 

Social/Engagement.  Again  in  most  of  the  surveys,  educators’ 
comments  indicated  that  the  game  served  a  Social/Engagement 
role in the classroom. This is promising for two reasons: first, it is 
somewhat  correlated  with  “fun,”  which  can  increase  engagement 
or encourage people outside of the classroom to pick up the game. 
Second, some of the educators used the game specifically because 
they had need of a non-traditional educational activity; Section 6.4 
explores the cases where the educators used the game, but would 
not  have  otherwise  covered  comparable  security  material.  The 
apparent  success  of  the  game’s  Social/Engagement  function,  as 
represented in the evaluation, suggests that the produced game is 
aligned with our Exposure Goal.  

6.2  Critiques and Tradeoffs 
The critiques of the game contained in educators’ responses were 
analyzed  as  falling  into  one  or  more  of  five  somewhat  self-
explanatory statements: (1) Takes a long time to learn; (2) Takes a 
long time to play; (3) Not enough fun; (4) Not enough educational 
value; and (5) Has inappropriate content. We discuss the critiques 
at  some  length  because  many  of  them  directly  reflect  the  design 
tradeoffs that we selected to meet our intended goals. 

Takes a long time to learn. Examples: 

  E5-no-play:  “Honestly,  after  reading  over  the  rules,  we 
didn’t understand how to play it, and we gave up. So sorry!” 

  E15-vetting: “The game itself is too complex to easily teach 

and use for the first time.” 

Following the shipment of the game to educators, we have created 
a new video that walks viewers through game setup and gameplay 
in  a  shorter,  clearer  format  (a  video  of  an  hour-long  conference 
talk  was  previously  available  which  contained  an  explanation  of 
how  to  play),  which  we  will  publish  online;  the  new  video  is  10 
minutes long. Some of the learning curve is due to the complexity 
of the game mechanics that we chose (Section 3.1); however, we 
accepted  a  level  of  complexity  as  a  good  tradeoff  for  increased 
replay value and the in-game opportunities to strategize. 

Takes a long time to play. Examples: 

  E14-classroom 

(15 
Security):  “Shorten 
components.” 

undergraduates, 

Information 
the  game  and  eliminate  some 

  E12-classroom  (22  undergraduates,  Computer  Security): 
“Students  reported  that  they  enjoyed  the  game,  but  that  the 
hour twenty was pushing the limit.” 

Gameplay  duration  can  vary  depending  upon  the  number  of 
players,  players’  familiarity  with  the  rules,  and  the  emergent 
characteristics  of  a  particular  game  instance.  Potentially  long 
gameplay can make the game unwieldy for the classroom setting; 
however,  the  gameplay  duration  can  be  an  asset  in  other  social 
settings.  Many  educators  indicated  positive  results  even  when 
playing a version of the game truncated to fit into a class period. 

Not  enough  fun.  One  example  (the  only  other  instance  an 
example of coder disagreement, and is given in the Appendix): 

  E3-vetting:  “The  feedback  from  the  instructors  trying  the 
game  is  that  it  didn’t  seem  very  enjoyable  to  play  or 
strategic.  It  may  be  that  more  experience  will  change  this, 
but the first impression was not positive.” 

While the players in the above example (adult instructors) are not 
our  primary  target  audience,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the 
instructors’  students  would  have  found  the  game  fun.  We  do  not 
have  sufficient  data  to  confidently  predict  who  will  or  will  not 
enjoy  the  game;  nevertheless,  observation  and  anecdotes  suggest 
at the very least that if the audience is familiar with and enjoys the 
style  of  game  on  which  Control-Alt-Hack  is  based,  then  it  is 
relatively likely that they will find the game fun. 

Not enough educational value. Examples: 

  E11-checkout:  “The  game  could  use  more  specificity 
around  computer  activity.  My  students  were  hoping  for  a 
higher level of rigor.” 

  E17-classroom:  “Since  we  approached  the  game  expecting 
to  be  tested  on  our  knowledge  of  vulnerabilities  and 
penetration techniques, we were dissatisfied in that manner, 
but we enjoyed the overall concept.” 

We  intentionally  chose  a  lower  level  of  technical  depth  in  the 
design  phase  in  order  to  further  the  Exposure  Goal  and  be 
comprehensible  to  a  wider  portion  of  our  target  audience;  in  the 
case  of  these  classrooms  that  decision  was  not  well  aligned  with 
instructors’ intentions. We  recognize that the  game is not a  good 
fit  for  students  with  a  more  advanced  security  background  who 
are hoping to learn new material; this would only be accomplished 
if  the  game  were  paired  with  a  supplementary  activity,  as  some 
educators chose to do (see Section A.4 in Appendix). 

Has  inappropriate  content.  There  is  only  one  instance  of  this 
critique appearing in the data: 

  E20-vetting-didn’t-read:  “I  didn’t  have  time  to  vet  the 
game  for  appropriateness  and,  from  what  I  did  read  on  the 
above site, I felt that the cards significantly contributed to a 
learning environment hostile to women.” 

We  do  not  wish  to  create  an  environment  hostile  to  women,  and 
kept  gender  issues  at  the  forefront  of  our  minds  during  game 
development. We  took  care to make references gender-neutral or 
gender-balanced:  for  example,  the  CEO  is  a  woman,  half  of  the 
Hacker cards are female, and with one exception, all innuendo is 
gender-neutral  (a  Mission  card  about  cell  phone  security  has  the 
title  “That’s  What  She  Said”).  We  recognize  that  innuendo  can 
make  an  environment  more  hostile  to  women,  particularly  if  the 
environment  already  has  uncomfortable  overtones;  however, 
during 
the 
appropriateness  of  our  content  from  multiple  parties,  including  a 
former  (female)  teacher  of  high  school  computer  science  and  3 
(female)  outreach  officers  (Section  3.2),  and  incorporated  it  into 

the  design  phase  we  gathered 

feedback  on 

922the game.  For example, we redid  the style of dress of one  of the 
female  Hackers in  response  to their comments. The materials we 
distribute to educators included a list of PG-14 cards which can be 
reviewed for content and/or removed from the deck. 

6.2.1  Discussion 
Table 3 presents the classroom-based educator experiences coded 
for the goals and critiques; Table 4 presents the same for the non-
classroom-based educator experiences.  

The most prominent critique was that the game takes a long time 
to learn (classroom:  4/14, non-classroom: 3/8). From observation 
and  anecdotes,  individuals  who  are  familiar  with  this  style  of 
game find it fairly quick to pick up. For example, E13-classroom 
gave this quote: “The students with some game experience found it 
obvious  and 
is  easy.”” 
Additionally,  we  suggest  that  educators  could  make  the  start  of 
gameplay  smoother  by  pre-designating  individuals  to  learn  the 
rules and play together ahead of time, so that those individuals can 
then seed gameplay groups during the activity. 

intuitive.  They  would  say  “this 

The  second  most  prominent  critique  was  that  the  game  did  not 
have  enough  educational  value  (classroom:  4/14,  non-classroom: 
5/8).  As  previously  mentioned,  many  of  the  non-classroom 
educators  reported  on  the  experience  wherein  they  vetted  the 
game, and chose not to use it in their classroom. Control-Alt-Hack 
may  not  be  suitable  for  all  educational  contexts,  but  its 
educational value can be increased by pairing it with or using it to 
bootstrap a level-appropriate supplementary activity, as done by 5 
of the classroom educators. 

The  third  most  common  critique—and  the  only  other  critique 
expressed by educators who used the game in the classroom—was 

Table 5. Classroom-use and non-classroom-use responses as to 

whether or not educator would use the game again, and 

whether or not the educator would suggest the game to others. 

 

Educator 

Would Use 

Would Suggest to 

Again 

Others 

E1-classroom 

E4-classroom 

E6-classroom 

E7-classroom 

E8-classroom 

E9-classroom 

E10-classroom 

E12-classroom 

E13-classroom 

E14-classroom 

E16-classroom 

E17-classroom 

E18-classroom 

E19-classroom 

 
E2-ACM 

E3-vetting 

E5-no-play 

E11-checkout 

E15-vetting 

E20-vetting-didn’t-read 

E21-lunch 

E22-vetting 

 

m
o
o
r
s
s
a
l
C

 

 

m
o
o
r
s
s
a
l
C
-
n
o
N

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No* 

Yes 

Yes 

No** 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

 

Yes 

No 

No 

Yes 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

 

Yes 

No 

No 

Yes 

No 

No 

Yes*** 

No 

Yes*** 

No 

*Might instead use with high school students or interns. 

**Not in class because of time constraints. Maybe as an out-of-class exercise. 

***Yes,  but  only  with  additional  material,  and  dependent  upon  going  over  it  a  few 
more times to understand how to incorporate.  

that the game took too long to play. Control-Alt-Hack may not be 
suitable  for  all  class  formats  and  in  all  contexts;  however,  from 
observation  and  anecdotes  we  tentatively  find  that  having  more 
than  4  players  in  a  game  significantly  extends  the  duration  of 
gameplay;  we  therefore  suggest  staying  below  5  players  in  a 
game.  Responses  indicate  that  there  is  some  value  in  playing  a 
short game, even if  players do not  have time  to finish;  educators 
who  provided  as  little  as  40  minutes  of  time  to  play  (E16-
classroom) reported some positive results. Additionally, gameplay 
is  somewhat  modular,  with  logical  periodic  stopping  points;  if 
players are already familiar with gameplay, then individual rounds 
are of manageable lengths. 

6.3  “Would Use Again” 
To  serve  as  an  overall  assessment  of  the  game’s  usefulness,  we 
asked educators the following questions on the surveys: 

Would  you  use  Control-Alt-Hack  again  in  your  classroom? 
Why or why not? 

Would  you  suggest  Control-Alt-Hack  to  others?  Why  or  why 
not? 

Educators’ responses are given in Table 5. Overall, the results are 
promising.  13  of  the  14  educators  who  used  the  game  in  their 
classrooms  reported  that  they  would  suggest  the  game  to  others, 
and  10  of  them  reported  that  they  would  use  Control-Alt-Hack 
again. E8-classroom responded that they would not use the game 
with those who already had some familiarity with the subject, but 
might  with  high  school  students  or  interns,  and  E12-classroom 
clarified  that  they  would  not  use  the  game  again  in  class  due  to 
time constraints, but might as an out-of-class exercise; for both of 
these educators, this suggests that they still find merit in the game, 
even if it is not an appropriate match for their instructional needs. 
E17-classroom indicated elsewhere in responses that the game did 
not contain sufficient educational content (Table 3), so we surmise 
that  is why they will not  use the game again  or recommend  it to 
others. As mentioned in the previous section, the educational level 
of  our  game  was  an  intentional  decision  related  to  our  Primary 
Audience and Exposure Goals (Section 2).  

For  the  non-classroom  experiences  with  the  game,  5  of  the 
educators  were  playing  the  game  with  other  instructors,  friends, 
graduate students, or staff to vet its use, and did not subsequently 
report  on  using  the  game  in  their  classrooms.  The  remaining  3 
educators  would  use  the  game  again  and  would  suggest  it  to 
others  (E2-ACM,  E11-checkout,  and  E21-lunch).  E21-lunch 
clarified that they might use the game again and recommend it to 
others, but only with supplementary educational material and after 
further  consideration.  These  three  scenarios—an  extracurricular 
club,  a  checkout,  and  a  staff  lunch—are  highly  aligned  with  the 
social, ad hoc interaction model supported by choosing to create a 
recreational game.  

6.4  Reaching New Audiences 
Interestingly, 2 of the 14 educators who used Control-Alt-Hack in 
their  classrooms  reported  that  they  would  not  have  covered 
similar  security  material  in  any  other  format.  An  additional 
educator gave this response, but was teaching a computer security 
course  (E12-classroom),  so  this  response  may  have  been  in  error 
or  a  misinterpretation  of  our  intention  when  posing  the  question 
(If  you  had  not  used  Control-Alt-Hack,  would  you  still  have 
covered  the  material?);  it  is  also  possible  that  the  educator 
intended  to  convey  that  they  would  not  have  covered  topics 
included  in  the  game  such  as  physical  security  or  cyber-physical 
security. We are conservative and count this response as an error. 
If the educators in the remaining contexts would not have covered 

923 
 
A 

B 

Participant quote  

Goal Mappings 

“Slightly. I was aware that active testing and debugging are needed to improve security + add to innovation, but the 
reminder was helpful. The game led me to think about some aspects of modern life I don’t usually consider.” 

Awareness #2: Breadth of Technologies 

“I have to be honest and say that I’ve never heard of a “white hat” hacker before. I’ve always associated hackers 
with a negative term. Computer security consists of a lot more tasks than I had at first thought it had. Computer 
security applies to a lot of areas, like cars and phone apps, which I hadn’t thought of.”† 

Awareness #2: Breadth of Technologies 

C 

--- 

D 

--- 

 

 

E 

F 

G 

“Not much. There was stuff such as not leaving laptops or usb drives out where others can get at them that I had 
known about but never gave much thought to before.” 

Awareness #3: Creativity of Adversaries 

“Little bit w/ thinking of different scenarios like the small level computer hacking. In general I think of bigger 
hacking crimes when I think of hacking.” 

Awareness #1: Importance/Impact of Security* 
Awareness #2: Breadth of Technologies* 

“No except that hacking might be fun – to use the knowledge to help solve a problem.” 

Perception #2: Professional Opportunities* 

L 

--- 

 

M  “Yes. I didn’t give much thought to it before or how many different ways it could be approached.” 

Awareness #3: Creativity of Adversaries* 

N 

O 

“No, except that its [sic] very complicated.” 

Awareness #3: Creativity of Adversaries* 

“Certainly lightens the mood for my outlook on C.S. and sheds some light for understanding reality of tasks 
involved.” 

Perception #1: Counter-Stereotype 
Awareness #3: Creativity of Adversaries* 

†This was actually in response to the question: Now that you’ve performed the activity, what do you think of when you think of computer security? (This may or may not have 
changed.) 

*These goals are only potentially implicated in the response. We invite the reader to perform personal interpretations. 

Table 6. User responses and mappings to our design goals. Participants with no quotes did not provide evidence indicating that 

their awareness or perception of computer security changed. Project goals are fully articulated in Section 2.1. 

comparable  security  material,  however,  then  these  classrooms 
represent instances where the game can serve to increase security 
awareness,  presumably  precisely  because  of  its  non-traditional 
format: 

After  performing  the  activity,  some  people  say  that  their 
perception  of  computer  security  has  changed,  while  others 
don’t feel that it has changed much at all. Would you say that 
your perception of computer security has changed? If so, how? 

 

 

E6-classroom:  75  high  school  students  in  a  Computer 
Science course with some prior informal security experience. 

E9-classroom:  60  high  school  students  in  a  Computers  and 
Information  Technology  course  with  prior  educational 
security experience. 

This  exposure  of  individuals  in  our  Primary  Audience  (Section 
2.3) to more security content than they might otherwise have been 
exposed is an indication of success. 

in 

this  study—we  gained 

7.  USER STUDY RESULTS 
With  the  educator  surveys—the  primary  evaluation  method  of 
Control-Alt-Hack 
the  valuable 
perspectives  of  informed  and  expert  individuals,  as  well  as 
secondhand  access  to  a  large  population  of  students.  We  also, 
however,  wished  to  more  directly  study  individuals’  experiences 
with  the  game,  and  therefore  performed  a  supplementary  user 
study.  We  primarily  simulated  the  experience  of  individuals  of 
varying  backgrounds  picking  up  and  playing  the  game  in  a  non-
classroom-setting.  Section  5.2  provides  background  on  the 
participants. 

In  performing  the  user  study,  we  received  participant  responses 
that  indicated  that—at  least  in  the  short  term—we  are  increasing 
or  reinforcing  participants’  awareness  and/or  improving  their 
perception of computer security and computer science, as per our 
Awareness and Perception Goals articulated in Section 2.1.  

Table  6  presents  participant  quotes  in  response  to  the  prompt  on 
the post-gameplay questionnaire: 

8  of  the  11  participants  provided  responses  which  gave  some 
indication  that  their  awareness  of  computer  security  issues 
increased  or  their  perceptions  about  the  field  were  changed. 
Interestingly,  even  though  some  of  these  participants  responded 
that their perception of computer security had not changed (2 out 
of  the  8),  they  proceeded  to  elaborate  and  provide  qualitative 
evidence that they were  engaged with  one  of our  learning  goals. 
For  the  remaining  3  participants,  none  of  their  responses 
suggested  that  their  awareness  had  increased  or  that  their 
perceptions  had  changed.  Some  participants  (3/11)  supplied 
critiques on the game; however, the sentiments in those critiques 
are  covered  by  the  educators’  critiques  (Section  6.2),  and  we  do 
not discuss them further here. 

There is a range of participant responses present even in our small 
sample  size.  The  Goal  Mappings  column  provides  a  loose 
mapping from the participant’s response to our project goals; the 
process  is  subjective,  and  we  invite  readers  to  interpret  different 
mappings from participant responses to project goals.  

The  project  goals  are  fully  articulated  in  Section  2.1,  but  they 
might be paraphrased and shortened as follows:  

  Awareness Goal #1: Importance/Impact of Security; 

  Awareness Goal #2: Breadth of Technologies; 

  Awareness Goal #3: Creativity of Adversaries; 

 

 

Perception Goal #1: Counter-Stereotype; and 

Perception Goal #2: Professional Opportunities. 

924All  of  the  goals  appear  at  least  once  in  Table  6,  suggesting  that 
we have had some success in crafting the game to touch upon the 
issues in question. 

8.  REFLECTIONS 
We  take  this opportunity to  discuss some  of our reflections from 
going through the process of creating, distributing, and evaluating 
a computer security-themed tabletop card game for the purpose of 
promoting computer security awareness and education.  

Physical Games in Security Education.  There is a long history 
of  using  games  in  education  (Section  9),  and  our  work  further 
attests to the benefits and value of using a game—and in our case, 
a  physical  game—in  educational  settings.    Such  games  do  not 
always  match  the  needs  of the  relevant educators,  but  when  they 
do  match,  they  can  provide  valuable  catalysts  for  engaging 
students  and  achieving  certain  learning  objectives—in  our  case, 
our Awareness and Perception goals.   

Game Mechanics Tradeoffs. Our main observations concern the 
selection  of  game  mechanics.  Overall,  working  with  pre-existing 
mechanics was a positive experience, especially given our lack of 
expertise in the area. We wish to re-emphasize, however, the fact 
that  mechanics  directly  dictate  or  heavily  influence  gameplay 
properties,  including:  how  long  it  takes  to  learn  to  play  a  game; 
how long games take to play; the replay value of a game; and the 
ability 
to  form  diverse  strategies.  Additionally,  we  were 
particularly  interested  in  how  much  textual  content  could  be 
inserted  into  the  game.  These  variables,  which  ultimately 
contribute  to  an  (unclearly  defined)  function 
that  dictates 
gameplay enjoyment, are somewhat interdependent. For example, 
the replay value of a game is somewhat dictated by how much the 
game facilitates strategizing; a game’s available strategies, in turn, 
have  some  relationship  with  the  complexity  of  the  game’s  rules, 
which  directly  affects  the  amount  of  time  that  it  takes  to  learn  a 
game, and partially affects the amount of time that it takes to play 
a game. 

While  these  gameplay  properties  do  not  have  clean-cut  direct  or 
inverse relationships, they nonetheless impact one another. When 
choosing  or  creating  gameplay  mechanics,  sometimes  tradeoffs 
will  be  necessary.  It  is  critical  to  prioritize  these  properties  in 
order to attempt to achieve an optimal fit. 

Communication  and  Representation.  One  of  our  takeaways 
from  the  educator  surveys  was  the  relative  importance  of 
communicating to educators the exact nature of the game that we 
were  distributing.  While  we  did  distribute  cover  letters  with 
shipped  games,  they  were  insufficiently  precise  regarding  the 
nature of the game. We never intended to design a game to teach 
penetration 
testing  methods.  Educators  have  a  number  of 
responsibilities, and may be too busy to fully vet a game before its 
use;  it  is  therefore  critical  to  provide  as  much  information  as 
possible  regarding  the  nature  of  a  game  and  its  intended  usage 
scenarios. 

Graphic  Design  and  Illustration.  While  we  did  not  attempt  to 
directly measure the contribution of the aesthetics of the game to 
achieving our goals, we do not wish to suggest its irrelevance by 
eliminating  it  from  the  discussion.  From  observation,  we  can 
comment  that  the  graphic  design,  illustration,  and  production 
quality  of  the  game  seem  to  have  a  large  effect  at  least  on  its 
initial  reception.  Perhaps  the  most  poignant  repeated  comment 
that we have received upon presenting the game to others is, “It’s 
like  a  real  game!”  The  difference  between  these  individuals’ 
apparent expectations and their reaction to Control-Alt-Hack is an 
implicit commentary on their expectations regarding “educational 

games.”  Further  study  could  help  place  the  relevance  of  game 
aesthetics in the context of overall success. 

9.  RELATED WORK 
We  separate  our  discussion  of  related  work  into  work  on 
commercial  games  and  games  created  more  as  research 
endeavors. 

9.1  Commercial Games 
Previous  commercial  tabletop  card  games  dealing  with  computer 
security  include  games  such  as  Fantasy  Flight  Games’  Android: 
Netrunner, published in 2012, and Steve Jackson Game’s Hacker, 
published  in  1992  (now  out  of  print).  We  believe  that  our 
contribution  is  distinct  in  several  ways.  First,  we  take  many 
opportunities  to  ground  our  card  contents  in  a  variety  of  current 
technologies and actual attack threats (see Section A.1 and Table 
7 in Appendix). While this means that Control-Alt-Hack is at risk 
of  becoming  outdated,  this  also  means  that  it  is  particularly 
topical.  Second,  while  these  games  undoubtedly  helped—and 
to  help—attract  people  to  computer  science  and 
continue 
computer  security,  they  portray  hacking—and  hackers—in  the 
style  of  a  particular  niche  (although  compelling)  subculture.  We 
chose,  primarily  via  graphic  design  and  illustration  choices,  to 
embrace  a  more  non-traditional  hacker  “tone”  in  the  hopes  of 
connecting  with  a  slightly  different  audience.  Third,  since  we 
created our card game specifically with awareness goals in mind, 
we  are  also  contributing  an  evaluation  of  our  game  in  education 
contexts. 

9.2  Games in Research 
Gondree et al. [11] gives an overview of some of the benefits of 
using  casual  games  to  impart  modest  security  information;  they 
reference Klopfer et al.’s [14] five freedoms essential to play, and 
reinterpret  those  freedoms  as  mapping  to  the  adversarial, 
exploratory aspects of computer security. 

 [d0x3d!] is a tabletop board game designed to casually introduce 
a  wide  audience  to  some  of  the  terminology  and  adversarial 
thinking that is involved in network security [8]. Exploit! is a card 
game that is primarily intended for entertainment for the security 
audience,  not  education  [5].  Elevation  of  Privilege  [18,  27], 
Protection Poker [33], and OWASP Cornucopia [20] are meant to 
help  train  and  augment  threat  modeling  and  risk  assessment  in 
software development. 

CyberCIEGE [4] and CyberProtect [30] are electronic games that 
have  players  act  as  network  administrators  who  must  utilize 
limited resources to manage overall network risk. 

There  are  a  variety  of  Capture-the-Flag  competitions  (e.g.,  [6, 
21]),  which  are  competitive  and  engaging  ways  to  promote  or 
simulate  offensive  security.  There  are  also  some  defensive 
competitions,  such  as  the  Collegiate  Cyber  Defense  Competition 
[19]. 

to  skill 

Educational  research  communities  have  looked  at  a  variety  of 
aspects  of  using  games  in  education:  for  example,  making 
educational  games  adapt 
level  [1],  using  game 
development  as  a  vehicle  for  programming  assignments  [24], 
using games to  teach specific topics such as  computer  ethics [2], 
or  using  games  to  teach  how  to  detect  phishing  emails  [25].  We 
stress, however, that educational games are used to teach a variety 
of  topics  beyond  computer  science  or computer  security,  such  as 
mathematical fractions (e.g., [3]) or algebra (e.g., [31]). 

In  the  context  of  security  education  research,  but  not  in  the 
context  of  games,  there  have  been  numerous  explorations  of 

925methods  for  helping  students  learn  the  technical  skills  necessary 
to protect computer systems against attackers (e.g., [17, 32]).  

10.  CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper  we  presented  the  design  and  evaluation  of  Control-
Alt-Hack,  a  card  game  for 
increasing  computer  security 
awareness. Our goal was to generate awareness of security issues 
and  improve  the  accuracy  of  people’s  perception  of  computer 
security  as  a  discipline  and  career  choice.  Critically,  we  traded 
some technical complexity in the topics discussed in exchange for 
increased  engagement:  put  another  way,  we  set  out  to  create  a 
game  that  players  could  find  inherently  fun,  from  which  they 
might learn incidentally in the course of enjoying the gameplay. 

the  game,  primarily  derived  from 

Our  evaluation  of 
the 
experiences  of  22  educators  representing  over  450  students, 
suggests that we accomplished our goals. Educators who used the 
game  in  their  classrooms  overwhelmingly  indicated  that  they 
would  suggest  the  game  to  others,  while  the  majority  reported 
both that they would use the game again and that students enjoyed 
the  game  and  experienced  increased  security  awareness.  2 
educators  teaching  non-security  computer  science  courses  would 
not  have  taught  the  material  without  the  game.  A  supplementary 
evaluation  with  11  users  suggested  that  even  among  a  small 
number of participants, their reactions are aligned with a number 
of our goals in creating the game. 

We view these results as a strong signal suggesting that our game 
represents  an  effective  model  for  disseminating  ideas  and 
encouraging  interest  in  computer  security.  We  hope  that  our 
process for selecting mechanics, designing content, and evaluating 
our  effectiveness  is  informative  to  those  wishing  to  undertake 
similar endeavors, and we hope that further research will explore 
the  usage  of  educational  or  awareness-raising  games  to  engage 
and inspire. 

11.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  Intel  Labs,  an  Intel  PhD 
Fellowship,  the  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  Computer 
Science  Education,  and  the  US  National  Science  Foundation 
(NSF)  under  awards  CNS-0846065  and  CNS-1247216.  Any 
opinions, 
recommendations 
expressed  in  this  article  are  the  authors’  and  don’t  necessarily 
reflect the views of the funding agencies.  

findings,  and  conclusions  or 

Control-Alt-Hack  ©  2012  by  the  University  of  Washington.  All 
rights  reserved.  “Control-Alt-Hack”  and  the  logo  are  trademarks 
of the University of Washington. The  game mechanics are based 
on the game Ninja Burger, © 2009 by Steve Jackson Games; used 
under license. 

Tamara  Denning  and  Tadayoshi  Kohno  are  founders  and  equity 
owners  of  RGB  Hats,  LLC,  a  private,  for-profit  company  which 
has  licensed  the  subject  technology  from  the  University  of 
Washington.  This  research  is  subject  to  the  conditions  of  a 
financial  conflict  of  interest  management  plan  established  by  the 
University of Washington. 

We  thank  everyone  who  playtested,  provided  feedback,  or 
otherwise  helped  improve  the  game.  We  thank  those  who 
graciously  lent  us  their  names  and  biographic  details:  Deborah 
Alterman,  Mike  Clarke,  Alexei  Czeskis,  Karla  Danson,  Iva 
Dermendjieva,  Miro  Enev,  Roxana  Geambasu,  Sidhant  Gupta, 
Dan  Halperin,  Melody  Kadenko,  Karl  Koscher,  Gabe  Maganis, 
Cynthia  Matuszek,  Temitope  Oluwafemi,  Franzi  Roesner.  We 
thank  Steve  Jackson  for  licensing  his  game  and  providing 
feedback,  and  Deborah  Alterman  and  Mike  Clarke  at  the 

University  of  Washington’s  Center  for  Commercialization  for 
helping  obtain  the  license.  We  also  thank  and  acknowledge  the 
following  people:  Gravity  Creative  (Graphic  Design),  Rob  Kelly 
(Character  Illustrations),  Web  Design  /  Development  (Thomas 
Winegarden),  Juliet  Fiss  (Product  Photos),  and  Tina  Wegner 
(Production Manager). 

12.  REFERENCES 
[1]  E. Andersen.  Optimizing Adaptivity in Educational Games. 

Foundations of Digital Games, 2012. 

[2]  B. Brinkman. The Heart of a Whistle-blower: A Corporate 

Decision-Making Game for Computer Ethics Classes. 
SIGCSE Technical Symposium, 2009. 
[3]  Center for Game Science. Refraction. 

http://centerforgamescience.org/portfolio/refraction/. 

[4]  The Center for Information Systems Security Studies and 

Research, Naval Postgraduate School. CyberCIEGE. 
http://cisr.nps.edu/cyberciege/. 

[5]  Core Impact. Exploit! http://www.coresecurity.com. 
[6]  DEF CON. DEF CON Capture the Flag. 

https://www.defcon.org/html/links/dc-ctf.html.  

[7]  T. Denning, C. Matuszek, K. Koscher, J. R. Smith, and T. 

Kohno. A Spotlight on Security and Privacy Risks with 
Future Household Robots: Attacks and Lessons. Ubicomp, 
2009. 

[8]  [d0x3d!]. http://www.d0x3d.com. 
[9]  S. Drimer and S. J. Murdoch. Keep Your Enemies Close: 

Distance Bounding Against Smartcard Relay Attacks. 
USENIX Security, 2007. 

[10] A. J. Feldman, J. A. Halderman, and E. W. Felten. Security 

Analysis of the Diebold AccuVote-TS Voting Machine. 
Electronic Voting Technology Workshop, 2007. 

[11] M. Gondree, Z. N.J. Peterson, and T. Denning. Security 

through Play. IEEE Security & Privacy, 11(3), 2013. 

[12] G. Gu, J. Zhang, and W. Lee. BotSniffer: Detecting Botnet 

Command and Control Channels in Network Traffic. 
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium 
(NDSS), 2008.  

[13] M. Hicks, M. Finnicum, S.T. King, M. Martin, J.M. Smith. 
Overcoming an Untrusted Computing Base: Detecting and 
Removing Malicious Hardware Automatically. IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2010. 

[14] E. Klopfer, S. Osterweil, and K. Salen, Moving Learning 
Games Forward: Obstacles, Opportunities, and Openness. 
The Education Arcade, 2009. 

[15] K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. 

Checkoway, D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. 
Shacham, and S. Savage. Experimental Security Analysis of 
a Modern Automobile. IEEE Symposium on Security and 
Privacy, 2010. 

[16] C. Li, A. Raghunathan, N.K. Jha. Hijacking an Insulin Pump: 

Security Attacks and Defenses for a Diabetes Therapy 
System. Healthcom, 2011. 

[17] P. Mateti. A Laboratory-Based Course on Internet Security. 

SIGCSE Technical Symposium, 2009. 

[18] Microsoft. Elevation of Privilege. 

http://www.microsoft.com/security/sdl/adopt/eop.aspx. 

[19] National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition. 

http://www.nationalccdc.org/. 

926[20] OWASP. OWASP Cornucopia Ecommerce Website Edition. 

https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Cornucopia. 

project  per  Mission;  we  acknowledge  that  other  examples  exist 
and that this is not a comprehensive list. 

[21] PlaidCTF. http://play.plaidctf.com.  
[22] A. Rabkin. Personal Knowledge Questions for Fallback 

Authentication: Security Questions in the Era of Facebook. 
Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS), 2008. 

[23] F. Roesner, T. Kohno, and D. Wetherall. Detecting and 

Defending Against Third-Party Tracking on the Web. 
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and 
Implementation (NDSI), 2012.   

[24] K. Seaborn, M. S. El-Nasr, D. Milam, and D. Yung. 

Programming, PWNed: Using Digital Game Development to 
Enhance Learners' Competency and Self-Efficacy in a High 
School Computing Science Course. SIGCSE Technical 
Symposium, 2012. 

[25] S. Sheng, B. Magnien, P. Kumaraguru, A. Acquisti, L.F. 

Cranor, J.Hong, and E. Nunge. Anti-Phishing Phil: The 
Design and Evaluation of a Game That Teaches People Not 
to Fall for Phish. Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security 
(SOUPS), 2007. 

[26] B. Shimanovsky, J. Feng, and M. Potkonjak. Hiding Data in 

DNA. Information Hiding, 2002. 

[27] A. Shostack. Elevation of Privilege: Drawing Developers 

into Threat Modeling. Microsoft Technical Paper, 2012. 

[28] Steve Jackson Games. http://www.sjgames.com. 
[29] L. Sweeney. Weaving Technology and Policy Together to 

Maintain Confidentiality. Journal of Law, Medicine & 
Ethics, 25(2-3), 1997. 

[30] US Department of Defense. CyberProtect. 

http://iase.disa.mil/eta/cyber-protect/launchpage.htm. 

[31] WeWantToKnow. DragonBox. 

http://www.dragonboxapp.com/. 

A.2 Educator Survey Contents 
The questions asked in the online survey distributed to educators 
are given below: 

1.  How did you use Control-Alt-Hack®? Please describe the 

activity. 

2.  How long did the activity take? 

3.  Were there any written or oral components that students 

turned in or presented as part of the activity? If so, please 
describe. 

4.  Did you present or assign any supplementary materials? If 

so, please describe. 

5.  What, if anything, worked well with the activity? 

6.  What, if anything, would you do differently if you were to do 

the activity again? 

7.  How would you describe students' level of enjoyment and/or 

engagement with the activity? 

8.  How would you describe students' level of learning with the 

activity? On what particular topics was their learning 
focused? 

9.  Why did you choose to use Control-Alt-Hack® in your 

classroom? 

10.  Would you use Control-Alt-Hack® again in your classroom? 

11.  Why or why not? 

12.  Would you suggest Control-Alt-Hack® to others? 

13.  Why or why not? 

14.  If you had not used Control-Alt-Hack®, would you still have 

[32] G. White and G. Nordstrom. Security Across the Curriculum: 

covered the material? 

Using Computer Security to Teach Computer Science 
Principles. National Information Systems Security 
Conference, 1996. 

[33] L. Williams, A. Meneely, and G. Shipley. Protection Poker: 

The New Software Security “Game.” IEEE Security & 
Privacy, 8(3), 2010. 

[34] E. Wustrow, S. Wolchok, I. Goldberg, and J. A. Halderman 

Telex: Anticensorship in the Network Infrastructure. 
USENIX Security, 2011. 

A. APPENDIX 
A.1 Card Topics and Research Papers 
Table 7 gives some examples of Mission cards that were inspired 
by  research  results.  These  examples  list  one  relevant  research 

15.  Did you cover the material using another (additional) 

method? 

16.  If applicable: What additional method did you use to cover 

the material? 

17.  If applicable: How would you compare these two methods 

(Control-Alt-Hack® and the additional method) of covering 
the material? What are the pros of each? What are the cons? 

18.  If applicable: If you had not used Control-Alt-Hack®, what 

alternative method would you have used to cover the 
material? 

19.  If applicable: How would you compare these two methods 

(Control-Alt-Hack® and the alternative method) of covering 
the material? What are the pros of each? What are the cons? 

Card Title 

Card Topic 

[CENSORED] 

Working on steganographic anti-censorship software  

A Healthy Dose of Security 

Consulting to improve the security of an insulin pump 

A Rash Decision 

Cookie-Blocked 

Cross-correlating data sources to de-anonymize medical records 

Writing a web browser extension to circumvent tracking cookies 

Crash Test Dummy 

Hacking an automobile 

E. coli Cryptography 

Implementing cryptography via synthetic biology 

Hay Baby, Hay Baby, Hay 

Demonstrating that a dating site has insecure password recovery questions 

Here’s Looking at You, Kid 

Analyzing the security of a WiFi-enabled, webcam-equipped toy robot 

I’d Tap That 

Mr. Botneto 

Pen testing the security of a contactless payment system 

Measuring a botnet’s growth, then reverse engineering the C&C algorithm 

One Hacker, Won Vote 

Pen testing an electronic voting machine 

Trojan Protection 

Looking for backdoors in the outsourced production of hardware 

Example Inspirational 

Research 

[34] 

[16] 

[29] 

[23] 

[15] 

[26] 

[22] 

[7] 

[9] 

[12] 

[10] 

[13] 

Table 7. Example Mission card titles, topics, and example research that inspired them. 

 

92720.  What is the subject of your class? 

21.  What is the class format (e.g., MWF 50-min 10-week course, 

was a reference to instructor’s syllabus content, not the video 
introducing the game’s rules. 

2-hour training seminar, etc.)? 

Takes a long time to play:  

22.  How many students participated in the activity? 

23.  What is the level of the students in your class? 

24.  What is the (approximate) level of student experience with 

computer science and/or computer security? 

25.  Is there anything else that you would like to add that we have 

not addressed? 

A.3 Educator Survey Coding Disagreements 
We  include  all  11  cases  where  the  primary  coder’s  and  the 
secondary coder’s coding results did not agree. The examples are 
given  below,  along  with  the  quotes  from  the  survey  which  were 
primarily  responsible  for  the  distinction  between  the  coding 
results. 

As  mentioned  in  Section  5.1,  except  for  one  case  in  which  the 
secondary coder misread the data and coded an error (Case 6), the 
primary coder’s results—the results reported in the paper—always 
represent the stricter of the two viewpoints. That is, in the Results 
Section  we  report  the  upper  bound  on  our  interpretation  of  the 
critiques  to  the game  and  the  lower  bound  on  the  game’s  role  in 
engagement and awareness. 

A.3.1 Positive Role 
Below we provide information on the cases where the primary and 
reliability  coder  disagreed  when  coding  the  positive  role(s)  that 
the  game  performed.  In  all  cases,  the  reliability  coder  coded  the 
game as playing the role, while the primary coder did not. Quotes 
that  led  the  reliability  coder  to  code  the  game  as  “Social  / 
Engagement” or “Awareness” are given below. 

Social / Engagement: 

  Case 1 (E11-checkout). “It was a 7/10. the students enjoyed 

it but the word did not spread around and ignite students.” 

  Case  2  (E12-classroom).  “Students  reported  that  they 
enjoyed  the game, but  that the hour twenty was  pushing the 
limit.” 

  Case 3 (E16-classroom). “The kids were all engaged with the 

game and playing it through.” “Would rate it 8/10." 

  Case  4  (E22-vetting).  “They  seemed  engaged,  although  not 

so much that I would expect they would play it for fun." 

Awareness:  

  Case 5 (E21-lunch). “Brought up some terminology that staff 

and IT had not heard before. "pwned" :-)” 

A.3.2 Critiques and Tradeoffs 
Below we provide information on the cases where the primary and 
reliability  coder  disagreed  when  coding  critiques  made  to  the 
game. In all cases except one (Case 6, coded in error), the primary 
coder  coded  the  educator  as  offering  that  critique,  while  the 
reliability coder did not. Quotes that led primary coder to code the 
critique are given below. 

Takes a long time to learn: 

  Case  6  (E10-classroom):  The  disagreement  was  due  to  the 
reliability  coder  misreading  the  response.  The  reference  to 
the  presentation  and  the  gameplay  taking  too  long  together 

 

  Case 7 (E1-classroom): [Q: What, if anything, would you do 
differently if you were to do the activity again?] “have more 
play time during the topic" 

Not enough fun:  

  Case 8 (E22-vetting): “They seemed engaged, though not so 

much that I would expect them to play it for fun” 

Not enough educational value: 

  Case  9  (E2-ACM):  “Learning  was  not  so  much  learned 
throughout  the  game,  but  it  did  pose  interesting  questions 
that the students were curious about” 

  Case 10 (E3-vetting): “I worry the card game will seem like 

a card game” 

  Case  11  (E12-classroom):  “Most  students  reported  a  low 
level  of  learning,  the  topics  that  were  reported  positively 
were presenting the students with real world context for what 
they were learning” 

A.4 Control-Alt-Hack-themed Assignments 
5 of the 14 educators who used Control-Alt-Hack in the classroom 
reported using a custom assignment in  concert with  the game, as 
described below: 

E4-classroom  (12  undergraduate  students  with  little  or  no 
prior  security  experience):  Students  were  asked  to  identify  at 
least  three  tasks  from  Mission  cards  that  seemed  interesting.  A 
follow-up  exercise  may  be  to  have  them  research  real-life 
situations where the theme of one of the tasks is involved.  

E7-classrooom  (56  undergraduate  students  in  a  Cyber-
Security  and  Information  Assurance  course,  with  little  or  no 
prior  security  experience):  Students  were  asked  to  take  a 
scenario  from  a  card  and  craft  a  research  paper  inspired  by  the 
scenario.  

E10-classroom  (65  high  school  students  in  a  Game  Design 
course  with  little  or  no  security  background):  Students  were 
required  to  answer  essay  questions  about  the  game  and  how  it  is 
put  together.  Optional  questions  asked  about  the  game’s  relation 
to the IT industry and hacker culture. 

E12-classroom  (22  undergraduates  in  a  Computer  Security 
Course  with  prior  educational  security  experience):  Students 
wrote one to two paragraphs discussing the activity.  

E18-classroom (30 undergraduate students in a Fundamentals 
of  Information  Security  course  with  a  variety  of  security 
backgrounds).  Two  questions  were  asked  before  the  game:  (1) 
What does information security mean to you?; and (2) What skills 
are  required  in  white-hat  hacking?  Two  questions  were  asked 
after  the  game:  (1)  Did  your  answers  to  the  previous  questions 
change  as  a  result  of  the  game—and  if  so,  how?;  and  (2)  As  a 
result  of  the  game,  did  you  discover  any  threats  you  hadn’t 
considered—and if so, what? 

While some of the above assignments are similar to activities we 
propose on our web site (http://www.controlalthack.com), some of 
the  assignments  are  original  and  demonstrate  an  interesting 
integration of the game into existing course plans and practices. 

 

928