A Threat for Tablet PCs in Public Space: Remote 
Visualization of Screen Images Using EM Emanation

Yuichi Hayashi 
Tohoku University 

Aramaki aza Aoba 6-3-09, 
Aoba-ku Sendai, Japan 

+81-22-795-6094 
yu-ichi@gcc.ne.jp 

Naofumi Homma 
Tohoku University 

Aramaki aza Aoba 6-6-05, 
Aoba-ku Sendai, Japan 

+81-22-795-7169 

Mamoru Miura 
Tohoku University 

Aramaki aza Aoba 6-6-05, 
Aoba-ku Sendai, Japan 

+81-22-795-7169 

homma@aoki.ecei.tohoku.ac.jp 

miura@aoki.ecei.tohoku.ac.jp 

Takafumi Aoki 
Tohoku University 

Aramaki aza Aoba 6-6-05, 
Aoba-ku Sendai, Japan 

+81-22-795-7169 

aoki@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp 

Hideaki Sone 
Tohoku University 

Aramaki aza Aoba 6-3, 
Aoba-ku Sendai, Japan 

+81-22-795-6091 

sone@isc.tohoku.ac.jp 

(EM)  emanation. 

ABSTRACT 
The use of tablet PCs is spreading rapidly, and accordingly users 
browsing and inputting personal information in public spaces can 
often be seen by third parties. Unlike conventional mobile phones 
and  notebook  PCs  equipped  with  distinct  input  devices  (e.g., 
keyboards), tablet PCs have touchscreen keyboards for data input. 
Such integration of display and input device increases the potential 
for harm when the display is captured by malicious attackers. This 
paper presents the description of reconstructing tablet PC displays 
via  measurement  of  electromagnetic 
In 
conventional studies, such EM display capture has been achieved 
by  using  non-portable  setups.  Those  studies  also  assumed  that  a 
large amount of time was available in advance of capture to obtain 
the electrical parameters of the target display. In contrast, this paper 
demonstrates that such EM display capture is feasible in real time 
by  a  setup  that  fits  in  an  attaché  case.  The  screen  image 
reconstruction is achieved by performing a prior course profiling 
and a complemental signal processing instead of the conventional 
fine  parameter 
tuning.  Such  complemental  processing  can 
eliminate the differences of leakage parameters among individuals 
and therefore correct the distortions of images. The attack distance, 
2 m, makes this method a practical threat to general tablet PCs in 
public places. This paper discusses possible attack scenarios based 
on the setup described above. In addition, we describe a mechanism 
of EM emanation from tablet PCs and a countermeasure against 
such EM display capture. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.6.5  [Management  of  Computing  and  Information  Systems]: 
Security and Protection —Physical security 
General Terms 
 
Security 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions 
from permissions@acm.org. 
CCS’14, November 3–7, 2014, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA. 
Copyright © 2014 ACM  978-1-4503-2957-6/14/11…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660292. 

 

Keywords 
Touch-screen  devices;  Tablet  PCs;  Remote  screen-image 
visualization; EM information leakage 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
The  number  of  touchscreen  devices  such  as  tablet  PCs  has 
rapidly increased in recent years. Accordingly, many users of such 
devices  enjoy  browsing  and  inputting  personal  information  in 
public spaces, where third parties are present, in addition to doing 
so in private spaces. Unlike conventional PCs, the users of tablet 
PCs  usually  input  data  with  keyboards  displayed  on  the  screen, 
using so-called software keyboards, as shown in Fig. 1.  

Such integration of display with input device causes a serious 
risk of harm when the integrated display is captured by malicious 
attackers. Both the entered keys and their purpose (i.e., place on the 
screen), displayed on the same screen, can be stolen simultaneously 
by a single display capture. In particular, software key-boards often 
enhance  the  entered  key  by  luminance  changing  or  visually 
popping-up to support user confirmation, which makes it easier to 
steal  key  information.  Even  if  an  entered  key  is  changed  to  an 
asterisk in the password section, as shown in Fig. 1, an attacker can 
obtain  the  key  information  from  the  enhancement  effects.  Such 
threats are potentially present in many applications that use login 

Figure 1: Typical screen shot of tablet PC with software 

keyboard. 

954information  (e.g.,  e-mails,  schedulers,  SNS  services,  online 
banking) or authentication information (e.g., online payments, and 
security codes in credit card services). 

The  problem  of  information  leakage  through  electromagnetic 
(EM) emanation has been studied in the field of electromagnetic 
compatibility (EMC) research. Such research is often referred to as 
TEMPEST, a codename referring to techniques and standards to 
suppress emissions that might compromise security. In the context 
of  TEMPEST  research,  EM  emissions  from  information  and 
communications 
technology  (ICT)  devices  are  defined  as 
“unintentional  intelligence-bearing  signals”  which,  if  intercepted 
and analyzed, may disclose the information transmitted, received, 
handled,  or  otherwise  processed  by  any  information-processing 
equipment [1]. The topics of TEMPEST include technologies for 
suppressing  such  unnecessary  signals  from  ICT  devices,  studies 
investigating  EM  emanation,  and  so  forth.  In  its  early  stages, 
technology for performing TEMPEST attacks required expensive 
and  scarcely  available  equipment  for  monitoring  such  EM 
emanations, and the security community previously believed that 
such highly sophisticated monitoring was possible in only military- 
and government-level attacks.  

At  present,  ICT  devices  at  risk  for  EM  information  leakage 
include  many  commercial  products,  such  as  CRT  and  LCD 
monitors  [2]–[12],  printers  [13],  and  keyboards  [14][15].  In 
particular, the threat of display capture via EM emanation, called 
EM  display  stealing,  has  been  studied  for  the  relatively  larger 
displays  of  desktop  and  notebook  PCs.  More  precisely,  the 
possibility  for  and  limitations  of  EM  display  stealing  have  been 
discussed for an individual display attached to a PC owned by a 
specific user and with assuming that leakage parameters specified 
to the individual can be determined in advance given sufficient time. 
In addition, the conventional setups for EM display stealing were 
non-portable  and  assumed  to  be  placed  in  doors  or  cars,  which 
imposed  a  limit  on  proximity  of  approach  to  the  target  display. 
Therefore, the previous studies [6][8][11] have discussed mainly 
zone-based countermeasures [16] that decrease the intensity of EM 
emanations to the background noise floor before those emanations 
reach eavesdroppers. Figure 2 depicts the concept of a zone-based 
countermeasure. 

EM display stealing from tablet PCs looks difficult in the context 
of  conventional  studies  because  tablet  PCs  have  weaker  EM 
emissions than conventional PCs do. Such weaker EM emissions 
are reduced to the noise floor quite close to the devices. In addition, 
tablet  PCs  are  often  manipulated  by  moving.  This  usage  makes 
time-intensive parameter tuning much more difficult. For the above 
reasons, the threat of EM display stealing from tablet PCs has not 
been discussed in conventional studies. 

Through this paper, we present an emerging and practical threat 
to tablet PCs in public spaces.  We assume here that attacks must 
be  conducted  very  close  to  target  tablet  PCs.  This  assumption 
requires a small eavesdropping setup that can be easily carried by 
the attacker and a real-time identification of the leakage parameters. 
Specifically, the contributions of this paper are as follows. 

-Portable and real-time stealing setup: A portable stealing setup 
is  constructed  to  observe  EM  radiation  corresponding  to  screen 
images  and  input  keys  near  tablet  PCs.  Filling  the  functional 
insufficiency  by  profiling  and  signal  processing  techniques,  the 
portable  setup  can  perform  a  real-time  EM  display  stealing 
comparable to conventional non-portable setups. In particular, we 
apply  a  prior  course  profiling  to  a  target  and  derive  an  accurate 
image  by  signal  processing,  which  makes  the  system  robust  to 
individual  difference,  eliminates  the  time  for  estimating  leakage 

Figure 2: Concept of zoning-based countermeasure against 

EM display stealing [16]. 

parameters,  and  enables  to  steal  information  immediately  by 
loading the leakage parameter. 

-Demonstration using actual tablet PCs:  The demonstration of 
the above EM display stealing is performed with widespread tablet 
PCs.  As a result, an entered key and its position are clearly stolen 
from  a  tablet  PC  2  m  away  from  the  setup.  Moreover,  possible 
attack scenarios are derived from the experimental results. 

-Leakage mechanism and countermeasure: A mechanism of EM 
emanation from tablet PCs is discussed. Using an EM interference 
(EMI)  model,  we  present  how  EM  information  leakage  can  be 
caused even by an unintentional antenna structured from internal 
wires. 
In  addition,  a  cost-effective  and  post-production 
countermeasure against such EM display stealing is discussed. 
2.  EM DISPLAY STEALING FROM 
TABLET PCS 
2.1  Basic concept 
This section describes a concept for EM display stealing from 
tablet PCs by use of a portable setup with prior profiling and real-
time  signal  processing  techniques.  A  conventional  setup  for  EM 
display  stealing  is  composed  of  a  receiver  to  capture  EM 
emanations,  a  device  to  measure  the  received  EM  trace,  and  a 
display.  In  particular,  the  measurement  device  requires  a  wide 
resolution  bandwidth  (RBW)  and  a  significant  sampling  rate 
[6][11][12].  As  a  candidate  to  replace  these  devices,  software-
defined radio devices equipped with a high-speed analog-to-digital 
converter  have  become  available  inexpensively  in  recent  years. 
Such  devices  can  program  any  signal  processing  technique  for 
digitized data. Though the sampling rate is limited to at most 100 
MSa/s, an RBW of 50 MHz is comparative to that of a conventional 
device.  In  addition,  the  signal  processing  can  adapt  the  size  of 
images  reconstructed  from  EM  emanations  according  to  the 
available display. Thus, a software-defined radio device can replace 
the measuring device, which significantly increases the portability 
of the setup.  

955Another drawback of the conventional display stealing method 
is  that  it  requires  a  large  amount  of  time  to  tune  the  electrical 
parameters (i.e., leakage frequency, horizontal scan frequency, and 
vertical  scan  frequency).  This  is  because  such  parameters  are 
unique  to  the  individual  hardware  units,  even  among  ostensibly 
identical devices [7][17]. Moreover, the reconstruction of leaked 
images has conventionally been carried out by inputting the tuned 
horizontal and vertical synchronization frequencies directly into a 
monitor. It was therefore necessary to measure the synchronization 
signals with a very high precision. For example, the conventional 
methods would require finding an exact value of 73.11696 kHz for 
the  horizontal  synchronization  frequency.  When 
inaccurate 
horizontal  and  vertical  scan  frequencies  are  obtained,  each 
reconstructed  image  has  a  different  distortion,  resulting  in  the 
reduction of  visibility.  Here,  we  exploit  prior  profiling  and  real-
time signal processing to reconstruct the distorted images. 

Figure 3 shows an overview of the EM display stealing, where 
the receiver (i.e., an antenna) and the display are omitted. In the 
profiling phase, we first study the three electrical parameters of a 
target  tablet  PC  and  acquire  a  reference  screen  image  with  a 
software keyboard, as shown in Fig. 4. The assumption here is that 
possible  differences  in  parameter  values  among  the  same  model 
(i.e., the same product) are adjustable by the following processing. 
We then receive the EM emanations and demodulate them by the 
amplitude of the leakage frequency from the advance profile. The 
demodulated  (analog)  signals  are  sampled  at  an  equivalent  time 
interval  and  converted  to  digital  signals.  The  obtained  digital 
signals are replicated by a number of samples, determined by the 
profiled parameters and the sampling rate of the device. Note that 
through the preliminary experiment, we confirmed pixels data were 
leaked  sequentially  from  tablet  PCs.  We  then  reconstructed  a 
display  image  by  separating  the  leaked  pixels  data  at  a  specific 
timing  corresponding  to  the  display  resolution,  in  the  equivalent 
manner as in CRT. In this paper, we call the separation periods in 
horizontal  direction  and  vertical  direction  "horizontal  scan 
frequency" and "vertical scan frequency", respectively.  After the 
replication, we obtain a series of 2D images from the observed EM 
emanations (Fig. 3(2)). 

The  reconstructed  2D  images  include  a  skew  (i.e.,  shear  or 
change  in  shape  from  rectangle  to  parallelogram)  and  a  kind  of 
translational  displacement.  Skew  occurs  when 
the  original 
horizontal scan frequency is not equal to an integer multiple of the 
sampling  rate  of  the  device.  (In  this  sense,  the  distortion  is  not 
actually a skew, but we approximate it as a skew for the simplicity 
of the subsequent signal processing.) Skew is not a concern in the 
conventional  setup  because  of  the  very  high  sampling  rate.  In 
contrast,  translational  displacement  always  happens  because  the 
initial point for drawing an image is not obtained from the measured 
data (Fig. 3(3)). Moreover, the proposed method shown in Figure 
3(3) does not require a high-precision synchronization signal from 
the beginning because, even if a relatively low-precision signal is 
acquired, the  screen  is  recovered  by  using  an  image  acquired  in 
advance from the tablet. In the case of the tablet used in this paper, 
the frequency value to two decimal places (i.e., 73.12 kHz instead 
of 73.11696 kHz) is sufficient for the horizontal synchronization 
frequency.  As  a  result,  we  can  measure  such  horizontal 
synchronization 
the 
conventional methods have difficulty in reconstructing screens that 
exceed the resolution of the monitor used to reproduce the target 
screen  while  the  proposed  method  has  no  limit  on  the  screen 
resolution since the images are reconstructed by signal processing 
on a computer. 

immediately.  Furthermore, 

frequency 

Figure 3: Concept of EM display stealing for tablet PCs by 

portable setup. 

Figure 4: Profiled image. 

The visibility of 2D images is greatly diminished by the above 
distortions.  In  particular,  the  distortion  by  the  translational 
displacement is different for each frame, which makes it difficult to 
recognize  entered  keys.  However,  the  above  distortions  can  be 
corrected by the following signal processing technique. In addition, 
after  correction,  automatic  keystroke  detection  can  also  be 
performed  by  a  simple  signal  processing  on  two  frames,  those 
before and after entering a key. 
2.2  Visibility improvement and keystroke 
detection 
2.2.1  Skew correction 

Skew transformation of the reconstructed image can be corrected 
on  the  basis  of  the  Fourier  amplitude  spectrum  of  the  image. 

956Consider an 𝑁1 × 𝑁2-pixel image 𝑥(𝑛1, 𝑛2). Let 𝑋(𝑘1, 𝑘2) denote 
the discrete Fourier transform of the image. 𝑋(𝑘1, 𝑘2) is given by 
 

𝑋(𝑘1, 𝑘2) = ∑ 𝑥(𝑛1, 𝑛2)𝑊𝑁1

𝑘1𝑛1

𝑘2𝑛2, 

𝑊𝑁2

𝑛1,𝑛2

2𝜋

−𝑗

2𝜋

−𝑗

𝑘1𝑛1 = 𝑒

𝑘2𝑛2 = 𝑒

𝑁1  and  𝑊𝑁2

where  𝑊𝑁1
𝑁2 .  The  amplitude 
spectrum 𝐴(𝑘1, 𝑘2) is  given  by𝐴(𝑘1, 𝑘2) = |𝑋(𝑘1, 𝑘2)|.  When  a 
software  keyboard  exists  in  the  reconstructed  image,  significant 
magnitude is observed along a direction in the frequency image (i.e., 
the amplitude spectrum), which is perpendicular to the edge of each 
key  in  the  spatial  image.  Since  this  relation  remains  unchanged 
even when the keys are slanted by the skew of the image, the skew 
can  be  estimated  by  the  dominant  direction  in  the  amplitude 
spectrum. To determine the direction, we can use any line detection 
method. In this paper, we employ the Standard Hough Transform, 
a commonly used method of detecting straight lines [18]. When a 
line 𝜌 = 𝑘1 cos 𝜙 + 𝑘2sin 𝜙 is detected in the amplitude spectrum 
𝐴(𝑘1, 𝑘2), the homography matrix for correcting the skew of the 
image 𝑥(𝑛1, 𝑛2) is given by the following equation: 
 

𝑯skew = [

1 tan(𝜙 +

0
0

1
0

]. 

) 0

0
1

𝜋
2

 
2.2.2  Translation correction 

Translational  displacement  of  the  reconstructed  image  can  be 
corrected by an image-matching method with a screenshot of the 
target  display  taken  in  advance  (during  the  profiling  phase).  A 
cross-correlation  function  is  computed  between  a  reconstructed 
image  and  the  screenshot.  Because  the  peak  of  this  function 
corresponds  to  the  translational  displacement  between  the  two 
images,  computing  the  correlation  function  makes  it  possible  to 
estimate and correct the translational displacement. Note that shape 
information,  such  as  edges,  is  preserved  between  the  captured 
display and the reconstructed image, but brightness information is 
not  preserved. For  this  reason,  a  Sobel  filter [19],  which detects 
edges  in  images,  is  applied to  each  image  before  computing  the 
correlation function. 

Consider  a  skew-corrected  image  𝑥′(𝑛1, 𝑛2) and  a  screenshot 
image 𝑦(𝑛1, 𝑛2).  Let 𝑥′𝑒(𝑛1, 𝑛2) and 𝑦𝑒(𝑛1, 𝑛2) denote  the  edge 
images originating from the two images, respectively. The cross-
correlation function between them is defined by 

𝑟(𝑛1, 𝑛2) = ∑ 𝑥′

𝑒(𝜉 − 𝑛1, 𝜂 − 𝑛2)

𝑦𝑒(𝜉, 𝜂). 

𝜉,𝜂

When the peak of the correlation function is (𝑛1, 𝑛2) = (𝛼, 𝛽), 
translational 

for  correcting 

the  homography  matrix 
displacement of 𝑥′(𝑛1, 𝑛2) is given by 

the 

 

𝑯trans = [

1 0 −𝛼
0 1 −𝛽
0 0
1

]. 

2.2.3  Keystroke detection 

in  each  frame,  keystrokes 

After  skew  transformation  and  translational  displacement  are 
corrected 
the  sequence  of 
reconstructed  images  can  be  detected  by  the  difference  between 
neighboring (i.e., temporally adjacent) frames. Software keyboards 
usually highlight key inputs by popping up keys or by reversing the 

in 

Figure 5: Block diagram and photos of portable setup for 

EM display stealing. 

Figure 6: Block diagram of profiling setup. 

key  luminance  to  support  user  confirmation.  We  focus  on  this 
feature to detect key inputs from the sequence. In the following, we 
describe an algorithm for detecting keystrokes when the luminance 
of  the  pressed  key  region  is  reversed.  We  note  here  that  similar 
techniques can be used in other cases, such as when a pressed key 
visually pops up. 

957(a) Reconstructed image. 

(b) Amplitude spectrum of (a). 
Figure 7: Skew correction. 

(c) Skew corrected image. 

(a) Reconstructed image without key 

input. 

(b) Reconstructed image with key input. 

(c) Difference image between (a) and (b). 

Figure 8: Keystroke detection. 

For each frame of the sequence, a difference image is found by 
subtracting  the  previous  frame.  When  keys  are  pressed,  high-
intensity  regions  are  observed  in  the  difference  image,  which  is 
caused by reversing the pressed key luminance. The pressed keys 
are  identified  by  matching  between  the  regions  and  the  profiled 
screenshot (i.e., the keyboard layout). In this paper, the luminance 
values  are  associated  with 
the  scan  codes  of  keys.  The 
correspondence between them is denoted by a function 𝑠, such as 
𝑠('a') = 65. 
Consider  a  difference  image  𝑑(𝑛1, 𝑛2)  and  a  keyboard  layout 
image 𝑙(𝑛1, 𝑛2). A masked difference image is defined by 

𝑙′(𝑛1, 𝑛2) = {

𝑙(𝑛1, 𝑛2)   if    𝑑(𝑛1, 𝑛2) > 0

otherwise 0

. 

information,  such  as  passwords,  even  when 

For  an  arbitrary  key  𝑐 ,  let  |s(𝑐)|  be  the  number  of  pixels 
satisfying 𝑙′(𝑛1, 𝑛2) = 𝑠(𝑐); that is, the number of pixels varying 
between  neighboring  frames.  When  |𝑠(𝑐)| ≥τ ,  the  key  𝑐  was 
pressed. In this paper, we assume τ = |s(c)| + 3𝜎, where |s(c)| is 
the mean of |s(𝑐)| and σ is the standard deviation for all keys of 𝑐.   
Using  the  above  keystroke  detection,  eavesdroppers  can  obtain 
personal 
the 
information is entered too quickly to be recognized by human eyes. 
3.  EXPERIMENTS 
This section demonstrates the feasibility of applying the above EM 
display stealing to popular tablet PCs. 
3.1  Experimental setup 
Figure  5  shows  a  block  diagram  and  photos  of  the  EM  display 
stealing  setup  in  this  experiment.  The  measurement  device  was 
implemented by a compact software-defined radio device (USRP 
N210). The receiver employs the superheterodyne system, which 
converts a received signal to a fixed intermediate frequency (IF), 

amplifies  the  IF  signal  by  an  intermediate  amplifier,  and 
demodulates  the  result  to  detect  the  original  information.  The 
detected  signal  is  converted  into  a  digital  signal.  The  IP  packet 
containing the signal is then transferred to a PC via Ethernet for 
follow-up  signal  processing.  In  the  experiment,  the  PC  and  the 
radio device were connected by a wired IP-based network. Note 
here  that  we  could  connect  them  wirelessly  and  use  a  remotely 
located computational device. The receiver was implemented by an 
off-the-shelf  UHF  antenna  (YAGI  UwPA),  where  the  reception 
frequency is from 470 MHz to 710 MHz and the antenna gain is 
from 4 dB to 5 dB. All the components of the setup are stored in an 
attaché case, as shown in the bottom of Fig. 5, that is compact and 
light for easy carrying.  

Figure  6  depicts  a  setup  for  profiling  leakage  frequency, 
horizontal scan frequency, and vertical scan frequency. The leakage 
frequency  is  identified  by  scanning  frequencies  beginning  with 
initial horizontal and vertical scan frequencies that depend on the 
display  specification.  The  EM  scanner  is  employed  to  fix  and 
manipulate  a  magnetic  field  probe  over  possible  measurement 
points.  Once  the  leakage  frequency  is  fixed,  the  horizontal  and 
vertical  scan  frequencies  are  fine-tuned  for  accuracy  of  hertz  by 
monitoring reconstructed images on a high-resolution display. We 
can identify the above three frequencies in a short time by using the 
setup  in  Fig.6.  Note  here  that  the  profiling  procedure  is  also 
possible  with  the  portable  setup  in  Fig.  5  if  we  have  a  longer 
identification time. As a result, we identified a leakage frequency 
of  653  MHz,  a  horizontal  scan  frequency  of  73.12  kHz,  and  a 
vertical scan frequency of 59.95 Hz in this experiment. The target 
tablet is one of the most widespread tablets, with a 1920 × 1200 
display and total sales in the tens of millions of devices. 
3.2  Image correction and keystroke detection 
This  section  presents  the  first  experiment  for  the  image 
correction processing described in Section 2. In this experiment, we 

958observed  EM  emanations  from  the  target  tablet  with  the  setup 
shown  in  Fig.  5,  where  the  leakage  parameters  identified  above 
were  used  for  the  reconstruction.  We  then  demodulated  the  EM 
emanation  by  amplitude  and  converted  it  into  the  corresponding 
digital  signals.  The  obtained  digital  signals  were  replicated  by  a 
number  of  samples  determined  by  the  profiled  horizontal  scan 
frequency and the sampling rate of the device. After the replication, 
we  obtained  a  series  of  2D  images  from  the  observed  EM 
emanations. 

Figure 7 (a) shows an example of the originally reconstructed 
image, where a kind of skew transformation is observed. This is 
because the sampling rate of the software-defined radio device is 
not  an  integer  multiple  of  the  horizontal  scan  frequency  of  the 
device, and therefore the demodulated signal is folded to the 2D 
digital image incorrectly. To correct the skew transformation, the 
amplitude spectrum of the image is calculated as shown in Figure 
7 (b). In the amplitude spectrum, a dominant direction indicating 
the skew parameter can be determined by a line detection method 
(here, Hough transformation). Figure 7 (c) shows the result after 
skew correction. We then calculate the cross-correlation function 
between the skew-corrected image and a screenshot image of the 
target  display.  Figure  8  (a)  shows  the  image  after  translational 
displacement  has  been  corrected.  In  addition,  we  detected 
keystrokes from the difference among neighbor frames in the re-
constructed  image  sequence.  Figure  8  shows  an  example  of 
keystroke detection, where the input `r'  key  was detected by the 
difference image (Fig. 8 (c)) between a frame without the key input 
(Fig. 8 (a)) and a frame with the key input (Fig. 8 (b)). 
3.3  Evaluation of individual difference in the 
same model 

This section demonstrates, through the second experiment, that 
individual  differences  among  devices  of  the  same  model  are 
negligible  and  thus  a  set  of  profiled  frequencies  is  applicable  to 
other individuals in the same model. 

Figure 9: Reconstructed images for different individuals. 

Using the setup in Fig. 5, we evaluated the visibilities of images 
reconstructed  from  EM  emanations  of  five  devices  of  the  same 
model. The display surface of tablet PCs faced the receiver from 30 
cm  away.  For  all  five  devices,  we  used  the  same  parameters  as 
profiled 
the  manner  described  above.  The 
experiments were conducted in a common laboratory space where 
other  PCs  and  electronic  devices,  such  as  LCD  displays,  were 
operating  near  the  experimental  setup.  The  five  devices  were 
purchased from different stores at different times. The production 
lot numbers differed between devices.  

in  advance 

in 

Figure 9 shows the reconstructed images, where each individual 
has two images, with and without a key input. We note here that all 
images  were  obtained  in  real  time.  We  confirmed  that  all  five 
displays  were  clearly  reconstructed  by  the  same  parameters, 
although the contrasts were slightly different from each other. In 
addition, we can clearly identify which key is pressed. Automatic 
keystroke detection was also possible for all images. 
3.4  Evaluation at different measurement 
distances 

This  section  shows  the  third  experiment,  which  evaluates 
possible  distances  for  EM  display  stealing.  The  experiment  was 
conducted  with  the  setup  in  Fig.  5  at  the  same  laboratory  space 
described  in  the  above  section.  Device  No.  5  from  the  above 
experiment was used as the target device. Assuming that the tablet 
would be used in a public space, we evaluated the visibilities of 
reconstructed images for different distances between the setup and 
the tablet, ranging from 10 cm to 2 m.  

Figure 10: Reconstructed images for different distances. 

Figure 11: EM Intensities at different distances. 

959Figure 10 shows the images reconstructed from EM emanations 
where the antenna was placed 10, 50, 100, 150, and 200 cm away 
from the target. Each distance has two images, with and without a 
key input. The results indicate that all the images are successfully 
reconstructed  and  visible.  As  in  the  above  experiment,  we  can 
clearly distinguish the key input from the two images. We note that 
all  of  these  images  were  captured  in  real  time.  Any  additional 
filtering and averaging procedures were performed on the images.  
The images reconstructed by EM emanations 2 m away from the 
tablet  were  the  most  obscure  in  the  experiment.  However,  we 
confirmed that the difference image between a frame with and a 
frame without a key input clearly enhanced the key input, as shown 
in Fig. 8.  

Figure 11 displays the intensity of EM emanations at different 
distances,  where  the  vertical  axis  indicates  the  signal  intensity 
observed  at  the  software-defined  radio  device  and  the  intensity 
value  is  normalized  by  the  intensity  at  10  cm.  It  is  difficult  to 
formalize  the  resulting  intensities  because  there  are  many  other 
electronic devices around the experimental setup and the emanation 
source might not be approximated by a reduction model of near EM 
fields  based  on  an  ideal  antenna  structure.  However,  we  can 
estimate the boundary of near and far EM fields from the results, 
where the intensity fell exponentially up to 50 cm comparable to 
the wavelength of the leakage frequency, and then reduced linearly 
from  greater  distances.  In  other  words,  the  near  EM  field  was 
observed  up  to  50  cm  and  the  far  EM  field  was  observed  from 
greater distances. This result suggests that the maximum distance 
could be extended by optimization of the antenna (e.g., the use of a 
high-gain antenna). 
3.5  Discussion of possible attacks 
The above results indicate that EM display stealing for tablet PCs 
becomes  a  possible  threat  with  use  of  a  portable  setup  and  the 
associated profiling and signal processing. Due to the portability of 
the setup, eavesdroppers can access a target tablet used in public 
spaces before the weak EM emanations are reduced to background 
noise. In addition, by using the profiling and signal processing, we 
can apply the technique to any tablet PC that is profiled in advance. 
Figure 12 shows images of some typical scenarios in which EM 
display stealing can be conducted in public spaces (e.g., in a café 
or on transportation). Eavesdroppers can perform such EM display 
stealing on any tablet PC used near the setup if the product model 
is included in the list of profiled models. We usually permit other 
people  to  be  within  a  distance  of  2  m  in  many  scenarios.  Such 

Figure 12: Typical scenes of EM display stealing by portable 

setup. 

Figure 13: Reconstructed images of other products. 

(a) Front side. 

(b) Back side. 

Figure 14: EM field distribution of leakage frequency on tablet surface. 

960Figure 15: Visibility of reconstructed images for different angles. 

expansion  of  applications  is  the  major  difference  from  the 
conventional setup. 

In  addition,  we  can  connect  the  output  of  the  setup  to  a 
smartphone or a tablet through a remote desktop, which means that 
eavesdroppers can manually confirm reconstructed images in real 
time. Such instant confirmation makes it possible to improve the 
visibility of reconstructed image and select only valuable images.  
Figure 13 shows the reconstructed images for other four products 
(three different tablet PC models and one smartphone), where the 
EM emanations were received by the same setup at a distance of 10 
cm.  We  can  confirm  that  all  the  key  arrangements  are  visible. 
Though some visibilities look lower than those of the above product, 
we can improve them by adjusting the characteristics of the antenna 
according to the leakage frequency. In contrast, if eavesdroppers 
identify the product to be attacked in advance, they can optimize 
their  setup  according  to  profile  results.  Moreover,  an  optimized 
antenna makes the maximum stealing distance much longer. Thus, 
the result suggests that the EM display stealing by our setup can be 
applied to other touchscreen devices. 
4.  DISCUSSION OF LEAKAGE 
MECHANISM 

Figure  14  shows  the  EM  field  distribution  of  the  leakage 
frequency (653 MHz) on the front and back surfaces of the tablet. 
The  EM  field  distribution  was  measured  by  the  EMC  Scanner 
shown in Fig. 6. The measurement interval was 5 mm, which is 
sufficiently smaller than the wavelength of the measured frequency. 
The total number of measurement points was about 1600 points, 
and at each of them, the EM field was measured by the Max-Hold 
function  of  the  spectrum  analyzer.  In  this  measurement,  we 
averaged  10  obtained  signals  to  suppress  the  influence  of 
background noise. In addition, we subtracted the EM radiation with 
turning off the display from turning on the display. The radiation 
map suggests that the EM field of 653 MHz was concentrated on 
the left half-region of the display at the front surface (Fig. 14 (a)). 
In contrast, on the back side, the distribution of the EM field is not 
concentrated  (Fig.  14  (b)).  Moreover,  a  continuous  distribution 
along 
the 
electromagnetic  field  distribution  of  the  leakage  frequency  is 
discrete for the back side. 

the  front  side,  but 

the  edge 

is  observed  for 

Figure 16: EM intensities for different angles. 

Figure 17: Disassembled tablet PC. 

Figure 15 indicates the visibilities of reconstructed images for 
different angles to the setup, where the setup is located 50 cm away 
from the tablet. A clear image was obtained when the tablet front 
surface directly faced the antenna (0°). At angles of 180° and 270°, 

Figure 18: Reconstructed images from EM radiation at the points 

in Fig.17. 

961the  contrasts  were  decreased  but  the  keystrokes  were  still 
successfully identified. However, the image at an angle of 90° was 
invisible. Figure 16 shows the signal intensity for the four angles, 
where the values are normalized by that at 0°. The results clearly 
show  that  the  strongest  emission  occurs  from  the  tablet’s  front 
surface.  

We  then  disassembled  the  tablet  and  reconstructed  the  screen 
image by measuring EM radiation emitted from some points on the 
device interior, in order to conduct a more detailed investigation 
regarding the points where strong emissions were observed in the 
magnetic field distribution on the front surface of the tablet (i.e., 
FPoints 1-5 in Fig. 14). Figure 17 shows the internal structure of 
the disassembled tablet, where BPoints 1-6 correspond to FPoints 
1-6 on the front surface, respectively.  BPoint 7 indicates another 
point on the center of the screen, and BPoint 8 indicates the cable 
(LVDS/FPD-Link) connected to the display. With the disassembly, 
we found that the parts where strong EM radiations were observed 
on  the  front  surface  corresponded  to  the  metallic  edge  parts 
enclosing the display. For measuring the EM radiation, we replaced 
the antenna part of the setup shown in Fig. 5 by a near field probe 
(LANGER  Near  Field  Probe  RF  R  400-1)  and  used  the  EM 
radiation  emitted  from  BPoints on  the  device  interior.   We  then 
reconstructed the screen image by the EM radiation measured at the 
BPoints. 

Figure 18 shows the results of images reconstructed by the EM 
radiation from BPoints 1-5, and 8. Note that due to the lower gain 
of the near field probe, the measured EM field strength is lower. 
For this reason, the reconstructed image is dimmer than the images 
in  the  previous  figures.  Although  there  are  differences  in  screen 
brightness, we verified that the screen can be reconstructed at the 
points  where  strong  emissions  were  measured  at  the  leakage 
frequency.  Since  the  components  other  than  edge  consist  of 
conductors,  we  also  reconstructed  the  screen  by  measuring  the 
emitted EM radiation at BPoints 6 and 7 as well, as shown in Fig. 
17.  The  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  19.  We  found  that  the  screen 
images  cannot  be  reconstructed  by  the  emitted  EM  radiation  at 
these  points.  Similarly,  it  was  difficult  to  reconstruct  the  screen 
image from EM radiations at the other locations on the back of the 
display.  The  same  results  were  also obtained  for  the  case  of  the 
front-side of the display. Figure 20 shows the images reconstructed 
with the EM radiations of FPoint2 (at the edge) and FPoint6 (at the 
center of the screen). The result suggests that the leakage from the 
tablet PC used in the measurement was likely caused by the edge 
of the display acting as an antenna.  

We also used a near field probe to scan the interior of the tablet 
PC in order to identify the source of the screen information leakage. 
As  a  result,  we  found  that  the  component  where  the  clearest 
reconstructed image was measured at the leakage  frequency was 
the flat cable connected to the display (BPoint 8) as shown in Fig. 
17. We consider that above-mentioned leakage is caused by digital 
signals driving the screen through the cable. This result is in fair 
agreement with that of previous study [5]. 

Based  on  the  above  results,  we  discuss  how  the  strong  EM 
emission is generated from the front surface. We confirm from Fig. 
14  (a)  that  the  EM  field of  the  leakage  frequency  (653  MHz) is 
distributed along the edge of the front screen. The wavelength of 
the leakage frequency is almost 45 cm, which corresponds to the 
length of the screen edge. From that fact, we consider the leakage 
frequency of 653 MHz, which would be one of the harmonics of a 
frequency  driving  the  display,  and  attribute  this  to  propagation 
through  the  wiring  pattern  on  a  printed  circuit  board  or 

Figure 19: Reconstructed images from EM radiation at the center 

of the screen in Fig.17. 

Figure 20: Reconstructed images from EM radiation at the points 

on the display (Fig.14(a)). 

Figure 21: EM field distribution of leakage frequency on tablet 

surface (Other product 4). 

Figure 22: Model of information leakage from tablet PC via 

EM field. 

962(a) "SANTE" EMI shielding films. 

(b) Applying countermeasure to tablet PC. 

Figure 23: Countermeasure based on EM shielding film. 

Figure 24: Reconstructed images with and without countermeasure. 

communication cables and emits through an antenna constructed by 
the wiring patterns and cabling. 

To check whether the above consideration can be applied to other 
devices as well, we measured the leakage frequency distribution on 
another tablet PCs with a different size. The results are shown in 
Fig. 21. The leakage frequency for this device was 714 MHz and 
the  wavelength  was  about  42  cm.  At  the  leakage  frequency,  the 
length  of  the  parts  where  the  EM  radiations  were  strongest  was 
about a single wavelength of the leakage frequency, which is the 
same as in the case of Fig. 14(a). The result backs up the above 
consideration.  

Figure  22 illustrates  the  concept  of  a  radiation  model  of  EMI 
[20–23] for such emissions. The digital signals in the device, which 
include the driving signal of the display, are represented as a source 
signal and shown in Fig. 22 (a). According to the signal’s peaks and 
valleys, the spectrum is spread over a wide band, as shown in Fig. 
22  (b).  If  the  significant  frequency  components  match  the 
frequency characteristics of the antenna constructed by the wiring 
patterns and physical structure of the substrate (Fig. 22 (c)), the EM 
wave is radiated efficiently, as shown in Fig. 22 (d),(e).  

In actual devices, some physical structures behave as an antenna 
due to coupling capacitance, induction between wires, and high-
frequency components contained in the rising and falling edges of 

the signal. As a result, strong EM radiation occurs from the antenna. 
Thus,  EM  radiation  is  generated  through  such  unintentional 
antennas in low-power-consumption devices, such as tablet PCs, in 
comparison with desktops and notebook PCs. The above radiation 
would make it possible to observe the leakage information at about 
2 m away from the device. 
5.  A COUNTERMEASURE 
This section discusses a countermeasure to prevent EM display 
stealing from tablet PCs. From Figs. 14 and 16, we observe that the 
leakage EM waves were mainly radiated from the front side of the 
display.  In  this  section,  we  focus  on  an  EM-shield-based 
countermeasure that can be applied after device assembly.  

In general, such EM shielding is a good practice to reduce the 
EM  field  in  a  space  by  using  barriers  made  of  conductive  or 
magnetic materials. Shielding is typically applied to enclosures to 
isolate electrical devices from the ‘outside world,’ and the barrier 
is preferably composed without any additional space to increase the 
shielding effect. Note, however, that if the shield covers the full 
display surface, the usability of the screen is reduced significantly. 
Addressing  the  above  difficulty,  we  discuss  a  technique  for 
suppressing  EM  radiation  without  reducing  the  usability  of  the 
screen by using a shielding material made of a conductive mesh. 

963As an example, we employ a transparent conductive film (Cima 
NanoTech Inc. "SANTE" EMI Shielding Films) having a mesh-like 
conductor  (Fig.  23(a)).  Here,  tablet  devices  usually  employ 
capacitive-sensing  methods  to  allow  interaction  with  the  touch 
screen. This means that we may not be able to input data from the 
touch  screen  if  the  shield  fully  covers  the  display  directly.  To 
mitigate  such  problems,  we  introduce  a  polarization  filter  of  a 
certain thickness and insert it between the shield material and the 
touch  screen,  as  shown  in  Fig.  23(b).  Thus,  we  can  reduce  the 
electrical coupling between the shield material and the touch screen 
and therefore allow input of data to the touch screen. If insufficient 
reduction  is  achieved,  we  change  the  mesh  size  of  the  shield 
material. Since both films are clear, the countermeasure will work 
from both electrical and visual viewpoints. 

Figure 24 shows the results of reconstructed images at 50 cm 
away  from  the  tablet  with  and  without  the  countermeasure.  We 
confirmed  that  the  countermeasure  successfully  shielded  EM 
radiation from the tablet. Thus, we can prevent EM display stealing 
by  applying  an  appropriate  shield,  which  greatly  attenuates  the 
leakage frequency. 

In  this  section,  we  examined  an  electric  countermeasure  to 
suppress the EM radiation. It would also be useful to combine it 
with software-level countermeasures as shown in [3][24]. 
6.  CONCLUDING REMARKS 
This paper presented the threat of display stealing through the 
EM field emitted from tablet PCs. A portable setup with profiling 
and signal processing techniques enables such EM display stealing 
in a general and real-time manner. This paper also demonstrated 
through an experiment that the proposed method could be applied 
to arbitrary devices of a known model if the model’s parameters 
were  profiled  in  advance.  Another  experiment  showed  that  the 
proposed method is available, even at 2 m away from the target PC. 
The results suggest that quite a lot of tablet PCs can be vulnerable 
to the attacks in public spaces since the variety of tablet PCs (by 
usage) is not large. The typical attack scenarios and the possibility 
for other products were discussed on the basis of the above setup. 
This paper also discussed a mechanism of EM emanation from 
tablet PCs and a countermeasure against the EM display stealing 
that  relies  on  those  emanations.  One  reason  for  the  information 
leakage  was  explained  from  the  EM  intensity  distribution  for  a 
specific leakage frequency.  Noise suppression techniques in the 
EMC field, such as the EM shields in Section 5, were examined for 
a possible countermeasure against such threats.  

All the components in our setup are commercially available, and 
each  profiling/signal  processing  technique  does  not  include  any 
significant novelty.  That’s why such EM display stealing can be a 
practical threat. The threat of EM display stealing from tablet PCs 
has not been discussed in conventional studies because tablet PCs 
have  weaker  EM  emissions  than  conventional  PCs  do  and  such 
weaker EM emissions seems to be  reduced to the noise floor quite 
close  to  the  devices.  However,  our  experimental  results  clearly 
identify the security hole of tablet PCs based on such EM emissions.  
On the other hand, there are several products naturally resistant 
to the EM display stealing.  Therefore, a  future study will be to 
examine the possibility for and limitation of EM display stealing by 
a  portable  setup  whose  components  (e.g.,  antenna)  and  pre/post 
processing  techniques  are  optimized  for  specific  products.  In 
addition,  future  studies  still  remains  for  comprehensive  and 
detailed analysis of information leakage  mechanisms  for various 
products  with  reverse  engineering,  which  would  lead  to  the 
development of more effective countermeasures. 

7.  REFERENCES 
[1]  NACSIM 5000: Tempest Fundamentals. National Security 
Agency, Fort George G. Meade, Maryland, February 1982. 
Partially declassified transcript: http://cryptome.org/nacsim-
5000.htm 

[2]  Wim van Eck, ``Electromagnetic Radiation from Video 
Display Units: An Eavesdropping Risk?,'' Computers \& 
Security, Vol. 4, pp. 269-286, 1985. 

[3]  M.G. Kuhn, Ross J. Anderson, ``Soft Tempest: Hidden Data 

Transmission Using Electromagnetic Emanations,'' 
Information Hiding, Second International Workshop, IH'98, 
Portland, Oregon, USA, April 15-17, 1998, Proceedings, 
LNCS 1525, Springer-Verlag, pp. 124-142, ISBN 3-540-
65386-4. 

[4]  M.G. Kuhn, ``Optical Time-Domain Eavesdropping Risks of 

CRT Displays,'' Proceedings 2002 IEEE Symposium on 
Security and Privacy, Berkeley, California, 12-15 May 2002. 
[5]  M.G. Kuhn, ``Electromagnetic Eavesdropping Risks of Flat-

Panel Displays,'' 4th Workshop on Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies, Proceedings, LNCS 3424, pp. 88-105, 2004. 

[6]  M.G. Kuhn, ``Security Limits for Compromising 

Emanations,'' Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and 
Embedded Systems (CHES 2005), LNCS 3659, pp. 265-279, 
2005.  

[7]  M.G. Kuhn, ``Compromising emanations of LCD TV sets,'' 

IEEE International Symposium on Electromagnetic 
Compatibility (EMC 2011), pp. 931-936, 2011,  

[8]  H. Sekiguchi, and S. Seto, ``An evaluation method of the 

display image reconstructed by electromagnetic emanation,'' 
Proc. of EMC Europe Workshop 2007, CD-ROM, no. abs-
133, 2007.  

[9]  H. Sekiguchi, and S. Seto, ``Proposal of information signal 

measurement method in display image contained in 
electromagnetic noise emanated from a personal computer,'' 
Proceeding of the 2008 IEEE International Instrummentation 
& Measurement Technology Conference , Victoria, Canada, 
May 2008. 

[10] H. Sekiguchi, ``Information leakage of input operation on 
touch screen monitors caused by electromagnetic noise,'' 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC), 2010 IEEE 
International Symposium, pp.127-131, 2010. 

[11] H. Sekiguchi and S. Seto, ``Estimation of receivable distance 

for radiated disturbance containing information signal from 
information technology equipment,'' Electromagnetic 
Compatibility (EMC), 2011 IEEE International Symposium 
on, vol., no., pp.942-945, 2011. 

[12] T. Tosaka, Y. Yamanaka, and K. Fukunaga, ``Method for 
Determining Whether or Not Information Is Contained in 
Electromagnetic Disturbance Radiated from PC Display,'' 
IEEE Transaction on Electromagnetic Compatibility, Vol. 
53, No. 2, pp. 318-324, 2011. 

[13] T. Tosaka, K. Taira, Y. Yamanaka, A. Nishikata, M. Hattori, 

``Feasibility study for reconstruction of information from 
near field observations of the magnetic field of laser printer,'' 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, 2006. EMC-Zurich 2006. 
17th International Zurich Symposium, pp.630-633, 2006. 

[14] M. Vuagnoux and S. Pasini, ``Compromising 

Electromagnetic Emanations of Wired and Wireless 

964Keyboards,'' Proc. 18th USENIX Security Symposium, 2009, 
pp.1-18.  

[15] M. Vuagnoux and S. Pasini, ``An improved technique to 

discover compromising electromagnetic emanations,'' 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC), 2010 IEEE 
International Symposium, pp.121-126, 25-30 July 2010. 

[16] International Telecommunication Union-Telecommunication 

Standardization Sector (ITU-T), ``K.84: Test methods and 
guide against information leaks through unintentional 
electromagnetic emissions,'' 2011. 

[17] T. Watanabe, K. Franke, H. Sako, ``Towards large-scale EM-

leakage evaluation by means of automated TOE 
synchronisation,'' IEEE International Symposium on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC 2011), pp. 937-941, 
2011. 

[18] R. O. Duda, and P. E. Hart, ``Pattern Classification and 

Scene Analysis,'' Wiley, 1973. 

[19] R. O .Duda, and P. E. Hart, ``Use of the Hough 

transformation to detect lines and curves in pictures,'' 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 11--15, 
1972. 

[20] D. M. Hockanson, J. L. Drewniak, T. H. Hubing, T. P. 
VanDoren, F. Sha,andM. J.Wilhelm, ``Investigation of 
fundamental EMI source mechanisms driving common mode 

 

radiation from printed circuit boards with attached cables,'' 
IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 
38, no. 4, pp. 557–576, Nov. 1996. 

[21] T. Watanabe, O. Wada, T. Miyashita, and R. Koga, 

``Common-mode current generation caused by difference of 
unbalance of transmission lines on a printed circuit board 
with narrow ground pattern,'' Inst. Electron. Inform. 
Commun. Eng. Trans. Commun., vol. E83-B, no. 3, pp. 593–
599, 2000. 

[22] H. W. Shim and T. H. Hubing, ``Model for estimating 

radiated emissions from a printed circuit board with attached 
cables due to voltage-driven sources,'' IEEE Transaction on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 899–907, 
Nov. 2005.  

[23] Y. Hayashi, N. Homma, T. Mizuki, T. Aoki, H. Sone, L. 
Sauvage and J.-L. Danger,“Analysis of Electromagnetic 
Information Leakage from Cryptographic Devices with 
Different Physical Structures,” IEEE Trans. on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 571-580, 
June 2013. 

[24] T. Watanabe, H. Nagayoshi, T. Urano, T. Uemura, H. Sako, 
``Countermeasure for electromagnetic screen image leakage 
based on color mixing in human brain,'' 2010 IEEE 
International Symposium on EMC, pp.138-142, Jul. 2010. 

965