Purchase details leaked to PayPal (Short Paper)1 

Sören Preibusch#, Thomas Peetz*, Gunes Acar*, Bettina Berendt* 

#formerly Microsoft Research 

preibusch.de 

*KU Leuven 

www.kuleuven.be

Abstract. We describe a new form of online tracking: explicit, yet unnecessary leakage 
of personal information and detailed shopping habits from online merchants to payment 
providers. In contrast to Web tracking, online shops make it impossible for their cus-
tomers to avoid this proliferation of their data. We record and analyse leakage patterns 
for N=881 US Web shops sampled from Web users’ actual online purchase sessions. 
More than half of the sites shared product names and details with PayPal, allowing the 
payment provider to build up comprehensive consumption profiles across the sites con-
sumers buy from, subscribe to, or donate to. In addition, PayPal forwards customers’ 
shopping details to Omniture, a third-party data aggregator with an even larger tracking 
reach. Leakage to PayPal is commonplace across product categories and includes de-
tails of medication or sex toys. We provide recommendations for merchants. 

1 

Introduction 

1.1  Online payment providers process rich transaction data 

Online  payment  handling  is  a  key  enabler  for  electronic  and  mobile  retailing,  and  a 
growing  business  opportunity.  Payment  providers  are  intermediaries  between  mer-
chants and their customers who buy and then pay for goods and services. As interme-
diaries, payment providers necessarily gain insight into the transaction, as they process 
personal information, just like the delivery company  will need the customer’s postal 
address. The minimum data requirements for payment handling are the order total, the 
receiving  merchant  and  an  authenticated  payment  method.  This  corresponds  to  data 
items traditionally collected during credit card transactions. However, a much richer set 
of data items becomes available for online purchases, including an itemised bill or in-
formation about the buyer, allowing for value-added services. These data are valuable 
for payment providers and merchants who can benefit from lower fees. 

1.2 

Privacy concerns and the principle of data minimisation 

The large-scale collection and processing of personal details causes privacy concerns. 
Concern is no longer limited to traditional items of personal information like address 
or demographics, but increasingly about consumption behaviour. Of particular interest 
is shopping data, whose value is demonstrated through myriads of loyalty card schemes. 

                                                           
1 Online companion at: http://preibusch.de/publ/paypal_privacy 

Purchase tracking now happens across channels (online / offline) and even if users are 
not enrolled in a loyalty scheme [1], [2]. 

Our research motivation is the ability of payment providers to collect purchase de-
tails at scale. Similar to Web tracking and analytics, a small number of providers cover 
multiple  Websites  (merchants)  and  can  link  transactions  across  those.  Compared  to 
cookie-like tracking, the privacy issues are exacerbated:  

─  Embedded tracking code is—in principle—ancillary to the core functionality of the 
Web page and can safely be filtered out (e.g., with ad-blockers). Payment handling 
is however essential to shopping, and users cannot complete the transaction without 
interacting with the payment provider. 

─  Unlike browsing patterns linked to a cookie identifier, consumption patterns linked 
to a payment method are not pseudonymous but identifiable through offline details 
such as credit card numbers or bank account details, which often include full name. 
─  Payment cards or account information serve as persistent identifiers, allowing the 

linkage of multiple transactions even across different logins or accounts. 

─  Consumers  are  typically  unable  to  evade  such  data  collection  unless  they  refrain 
from shopping with the given merchant. The collection of shoppers’ details is a neg-
ative externality of the contract between the merchant and the payment provider. 

─  Payment handling is universal across merchants and sectors. Consumer details are 
collected and merged across transactions even for sensitive products and merchants. 
This includes pharmacies or adult entertainment, for instance, where shoppers delib-
erately moved out of the high street and onto the Web in a pursuit of privacy. 

Privacy threats arise from detailed purchase patterns when more than the minimum data 
required are collected. Although the principle of data minimisation has long been cod-
ified in national law and international privacy guidelines (e.g., by the OECD [3]), it is 
only  with  the  European  Union’s  upcoming  General  Data  Protection  Regulation,  that 
data minimisation is becoming an enforceable principle [4]. 

1.3  Research questions and our contribution 

Ahead  of  tightening  regulation  regarding  data  minimisation,  recognising  that  online 
payment handling is a growing market, we set out to explore the tracking capabilities 
of online payment providers.  

We conducted the first industry-wide, empirical survey that quantifies the flows of 
customer data from N=881 merchants to PayPal. We describe current practices of data 
proliferation  which can soon be deemed privacy leaks. PayPal is chosen as the  most 
pervasive online payment provider, covering Websites across strata of popularity [5]. 
We investigate which personal and transactions details merchants are sharing with Pay-
Pal above pure order totals (Fig. 1). Our survey of the ecosystem also looks for per-
sector  differences  in  data  sharing  with  payment  providers  or  whether  more  popular 
Websites leak more or less personal details. 

2 

Related work 

Our investigation complements and expands an existing body of literature that has em-
pirically examined privacy and tracking practices at large. Bonneau and Preibusch stud-
ied privacy practices across the entire online social networking ecosystem and found 
unsatisfactory privacy practices across the industry [6]. They also investigated data pro-
tection practices across different industries [7] and found that poor practices were com-
monplace regarding password security, although merchant sites did better than news-
paper sites. Specifically for Web shops, more expensive shops were found to collect 
significantly more personal details than their cheaper competitors [8]. 

A number of Web privacy surveys studied the private information leakage, different 
tracking mechanisms and their prevalence on the Web. Krishnamurthy and Wills show 
how personally identifiable information leaks via online social networks, including the 
leakage by HTTP Referer header [9]. Other researchers surveyed the use of more ad-
vanced and resilient tracking mechanisms such as evercookies [10], [11], [12], browser 
fingerprinting [12], [13], [14] and cookie syncing [12], commonly reporting on ques-
tionable practices and unexpected prevalence of such technologies. 

Finally,  researchers  looked  into  consumers’  privacy  choices  in  online  shopping. 
Buyers of sensitive products (vibrators) were found to pay a premium to shop with a 
retailer whose privacy practices were labelled as superior by a product search engine 
[15]. In the largest ever lab and field experiment in privacy economics, almost one in 
three Web shoppers paid one euro extra for keeping their mobile phone number private 
[16]. When privacy comes for free, more than 80% of consumers choose the company 
that collects less personal information [16]. Earlier results indicated that price discounts 
override online shoppers’ privacy preferences [17]. 

3  Methodology 

3.1  Background: PayPal integration, information flows, privacy agreements 

PayPal has been a pioneer to offer payment acceptance to electronic retailers, albeit its 
product range now covers a plenitude of card and card-less payment and identity ser-
vices for online, offline, and mobile transactions. Similar to a cloud service, PayPal’s 
offerings are characterised by their ease of set-up, pay per use, and self-service. 

PayPal offers multiple ways to be embedded in the shopping workflow, traditionally 
depending on  the type of payment  [18]. On a technical level, there are two different 
integration routes depending on how the session data is transmitted from the merchant 
to PayPal: (1) server-to-server integration, where SOAP Web services or REST APIs 
are used to communicate transaction details from the merchant to PayPal; (2) integra-
tion  via  the  client,  where  transaction  parameters  are  passed  exclusively  through  the 
query string (GET) by means of buyers’ browsers. 

Integration via GET is simple and readily available for hosted Websites, as no server-
side  communication  is  required  (“buttons”  in  PayPal  parlance).  More  sophisticated 
methods  use  server-to-server  communication  between  the  application  server  and  the 

payment provider: the merchant creates a session with the payment provider when sub-
mitting all relevant transaction data. This session is then referenced through a session 
identifier or token (“EC token”), which is the only information that the client needs to 
pass on [19]. This method requires more technical expertise, but is less susceptible to 
manipulation  by  the  client.  However,  server-to-server  communication  cannot  be  ob-
served in a study like ours, where the client is instrumented. 

Payment sessions referenced via an EC token are very common. The unobservable 
flow of personal information between servers is a challenge for our research. We there-
fore use personal data that PayPal displays back to the user to establish a lower bound 
for the privacy invasion by the data that is transmitted (Section 3.3). 

The “Legal Agreements for PayPal Services” [20] outline a number of requirements 
for merchants. All information submitted to the API must be “true, correct, and com-
plete” [21]. Whereas all fields containing personal information are optional [22], a “de-
scription field to identify the goods” and a URL linking back to the original product 
page must be provided for the popular Express Checkout method [22]. 

3.2 

Sampling 

We sample online shops that target US consumers and provide checkout in US Dollar 
via  PayPal.  The  US  market  is  chosen  for  its  size  and  for  being  the  home  market  of 
PayPal. We sample popular Web shops from real online shopping sessions, seeded from 
Internet Explorer users who opted in to share their browsing history. Practices at these 
popular online destinations impact a large consumer population. Stores are identified 
by their URL, as occurring before the PayPal checkout page in browser sessions. For 
each URL, we selected a single product for purchase, following a strict procedure. 

We  excluded  Websites  offering  business  services  (B2B  such  as  email  marketing 
campaigns), banks and insurances, and restricted Websites which required a prior cus-
tomer relationship such as utility companies. Airline Websites were often excluded for 
we  were  unable  to  complete  the  purchase  according  to  our  data  collection  protocol. 
EBay, PayPal internal and duplicate Websites were excluded. 

Hosting sites (e.g., Yahoo! shops or Google Sites) were excluded and separated from 
the sample for future analysis. Such sites host multiple shops with differing implemen-
tation practices under a single domain. A few representative sub-shops were chosen for 
affiliate shops (e.g., spreadshirt.com) and shop-in-shop solutions (e.g., atgstores.com).  

3.3  Experimental protocol 

For reliable results, a strict data collection protocol was followed during the main 
data collection, after a pilot study on 40 Websites. The details of the experimental setup 
and procedures are laid out in the Online Companion. To avoid contamination of the 
results  by  residual  cookies  or  other  re-identification  methods,  a  virtual  machine  was 
used and reset for every recording anew. Transaction data were recorded while navi-
gating from the product page to PayPal’s checkout screen. Browsing was done in Fire-
fox and all HTTP and HTTPS traffic was captured by mitmproxy [23] and stored. This 
includes GET and POST requests and the parameters submitted with them. Web forms 

 

 
e
m
a
Site count  N

C1

  391 (44%) 

 

 
s
s
e
r
d
d
A

 

 
l
i
a
m
E

  

 

 

Leaks nothing. 

C2

  34 (4%) 

□ 

□ 

  

 
e
n
o
h
P

  

  

 
g
n
i
p
p
i
h
S

  

 
y
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

 

 
s
e
c
i
r
P

  

 
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

 
e
m
a
N

 
.
d
o
r
P

  

  

 
n
i
m
 
k
a
e
L

0 

 
x
a
m
 
k
a
e
L

0 

1 

3 

 

 

Usually leaks two of names, item numbers, and prices. 

C3

  292 (33%) 

  

  

  

  

  

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

3 

4 

 

 

Leaks at least names, item numbers, and prices. 

C4

  155 (18%) 

  

  

  

  

■ 

□ 

■ 

□ 

□ 

4 

5 

 

 

Leaks at least most product details and always shipping costs. 

C5☠  9 (1%) 
 

 

■ 

■ 

□ 

  

□ 

□ 

■ 

□ 

□ 

6 

7 

Leaks name and address in addition to product details. 

Table 1. Leaked data by clusters ranked from good to bad privacy practices. The common leak-
age of product details is more worrying than the seeming absence of customer data: PayPal col-
lects identity details directly during payment. Leaked: □ = sometimes, ■ = always, blank = never  

were completed by using the same fictitious profile data on every site, a woman in her 
40s living in a major US city. A unique email address was used for each Website. Alt-
hough data collection was tool-supported, there was always a human in the loop. 

4 

Data analysis 

4.1  Data description  

 Dataset. From an initial list of 1200 extracted from browsing sessions, we successfully 
collected data for N=881 merchant Websites: HTTP(S) traffic traces until reaching the 
PayPal login page, and screenshot upon arrival. The parsed logs and transcribed screen-
shots constitute all evidence of personal identifiable information (PII) leakage a cus-
tomer can capture. More than 86% of all Websites use a token implementation; we rely 
on the screenshots for those as PII leakage cannot be inferred from the client logs. 

To  verify  our  screenshot-based  approach,  we  checked  whether  the  PayPal  screen 
always displays all PII received over the GET query-string. We were able to confirm 
that whenever customer or product data was leaked via GET, it showed up on the Pay-
Pal login screen. The only exception was for shipping costs of USD 0.00, which was 
forwarded but hidden in 36 cases. 

Clustering of leakage patterns. The leakage patterns form the backbone of our work. 
To analyse the data more deeply, we reduce the number of distinct patterns by cluster-
ing all 881 URLs into only few classes (Table 1). We use EM clustering [24], which 
automatically determines the appropriate number of clusters.  

A natural question is whether a particular combination of endpoint and token usage 
enforces or prevents leakage. Analysing the clusters with association rule mining indi-
cates no such relationship: None of the clusters are homogeneous with respect to end-
points and tokens, except for C2, which does not contain any token implementations. 

Privacy-friendly Websites tend to use a token more often: 98% of all  Websites in 
Cluster C1 were using a token, compared to 86% and 85% for C3 and C4, respectively 
(p < 0.0001, two-tailed Fisher’s exact test). 

We observe that no Websites leaking customer addresses rely on a token implemen-
tation. With a sample size of nine this holds little statistical significance, but we found 
no indication in the API documentation that this is a requirement on PayPal’s side. We 
conclude that PayPal’s available API methods do not bias Web shops to treat custom-
ers’ privacy in a specific way. 

4.2  Adding Alexa metadata: Website popularity and quality 

We investigated whether Website popularity and technical quality had an influence on 
privacy-friendliness.  We  use  the  Alexa  Web  Information  Service  (AWIS)  features 
‘speed percentile’ and ‘traffic rank’ as proxies. Speed percentile has no immediate bear-
ing on cluster membership. Rather, we see that the number of sites from a certain cluster 
scale with the overall number of sites in the speed percentile. We further see that the 
distribution of sites from the clusters over the percentile bins follow no specific pattern. 
It can thus not be said that the speed of a  Website has a positive correlation with its 
privacy-friendliness. 

Less popular sites  are found significantly  more often in clusters that exhibit  more 
leakage.  More  popular  sites  tend  to  leak  less.  For  illustrative  purposes,  the  average 
traffic  rank  is  0.4m  for  C1,  1.0m  for  C3  and  1.4m  for  C4.  A  Mann-Whitney  U  test 
indicates a highly significant difference in the traffic ranks per cluster (p = 0.001 for 
both pairwise comparisons). Sites in the worst leakage C5 do not appear among the 50 
highest ranked in our sample. 

4.3  Third-party tracking facilitated by PayPal, and internal persistent cookies 

Analysis  of  the  HTTP  traffic  observed  during  the  experiments  revealed  the  use  of 
Adobe’s Omniture tracking software on PayPal checkout pages. When a user lands on 
the PayPal checkout page, two HTTP requests were sent to paypal.d1.sc.omtrdc.net and 
paypal.112.2o7.net,  which  both  belong  to  Omniture  [25].  The  requests  contain 
metadata about the payment to be made, such as currency and transaction token, along 
with the user’s browser characteristics such as plugins, screen dimensions and software 
versions [26]. Remarkably, PayPal also shares the Referer URL of the checkout page, 
which reveals the URL of the Web shop, and potentially the product to be purchased. 

The transfer of these details enables Adobe to build a better profile of 152 million Pay-
Pal users [5], by combining payment details  with other online activities recorded on 
more than 300,000 Omniture-tracked Websites [27], which notably includes 50 of the 
Web shops analysed in this study. 

Note that the leakage described here is different from the indirect information leak-
age  via  Referer  headers  as  studied  in  [28],  since  the  PayPal  checkout  page  actively 
collects and sends the Referer of the checkout page, which would not be shared other-
wise with the Omniture domains. Furthermore, by sending high-entropy browser prop-
erties such as plugins and screen dimensions, PayPal make it possible for Omniture to 
track  users  by  their  browser  fingerprints  even  if  they  block  cookies  or  use  private 
browsing mode [13]. 

According to its privacy policy, PayPal may share customers’ personal information 
with third-party service providers [29] who are limited to use PayPal customers’ infor-
mation “in connection with the services they perform for [PayPal].” Assuming the in-
formation shared with Omniture is subject to a similar agreement, it is hard to make 
sure whether payment information, product URL or browser characteristics are inter-
preted as personal information or not, given the possible interpretations of the policy 
and lack of transparency around PayPal's contracts with third-parties. 

As of September 14th, 2014, long after we finished with the experiments, the PayPal 
checkout page no longer references a third-party tracker, though Omniture is still used 
on the PayPal homepage. 

PayPal  still  deploys  two  questionable,  internal  tracking  mechanisms:  evercookies 
and  browser  fingerprinting.  Although  these  techniques  may  be  helpful  in  preventing 
account hijacking or similar fraudulent activities, their use is not mentioned explicitly 
in PayPal’s privacy policy. These tracking techniques are difficult to avoid for users 
and have led to lawsuits and multi-million dollar settlements in the past [30]. 

5 

Limitations 

As outlined in Section 2, our sampling strategy combined Web shop URLs from differ-
ent sources to cover both larger and smaller merchants. We expect our dataset to contain 
an equal distribution over more and less professional Websites, as well as more and less 
frequented ones. 

This comes at the price of diversity of goods that are sold. It easily observed that 
there  are  more  Web  shops  selling  physical  goods  than  there  are  commercial  dating 
Websites, for instance. This makes statistically significant statements about  differing 
privacy practices hard, if not impossible. 

Fig. 1. Sites selling sensitive products also leak product details to PayPal: adult toys and medi-
cation (5-HTP addresses depression, anxiety, sleep disorders). Also see the online companion. 

 

For obvious reasons, our data collection setup could not cover server-to-server com-
munication, which, according to PayPal documentation [18], can be used by merchants 
to communicate with PayPal. Also, in our experiments we did not go beyond the PayPal 
checkout page to complete the payments. As a result, the data collected and leaked after 
the PayPal checkout page is not covered in our analysis. 

6 

Conclusion and discussion 

We presented a new species in the zoo of online tracking systems: explicit leakage of 
personal information and detailed shopping habits from online merchants to payment 
providers. In contrast to the widely debated tracking of Web browsing, online  shops 
make it impossible for their customers to avoid this proliferation of their data.  

By mediating online payments between merchants and buyers, payment providers 
are in a position to access sensitive payment details that can be used to build a detailed 
profile  of  shopping  habits.  Being  the  most  popular  payment  provider,  PayPal  learns 
how much money its 152 million customers are spending and where. These customers 
are  identified  by  name,  email  and  postal  address  and  through  their  bank  details.  We 
have demonstrated that  merchant Websites are unnecessarily  forwarding product de-
tails to PayPal that give a detailed view on consumers’ purchases. 

According to our analysis, 52% of the Web shops in our study shared product names, 
item numbers and descriptions with PayPal. On the other hand, the remaining 388 sites 
did not share any purchase details except the amount to be paid, confirming that sharing 
sensitive details is not necessary for electronic retailers. 

Further,  we reported on the PayPal’s  use of  the tracking  service Omniture,  which 
amplifies  the  privacy  concerns  by  exposing  transaction  details  to  a  widely  deployed 
third-party  tracker.  A  third-party  tracker  that  has  access  to  general  Web  tracking 
information,  as  well  as  to  the  details  of  successfully  completed  transactions,  is  in  a 
particularly privileged situation to monitor consumption choices at large. 

Web shops that use the technically more advanced token-based integration are often 
more privacy-friendly. Also, less popular sites are significantly more often among those 
that leak more personal information. There are no systematic differences across product 
categories, meaning that all kinds of shoppers are exposed. 

By  exploring  the  alternative  privacy  preserving  practices  that  can  be  followed  by 
Web  shops,  we  distilled  the  following  suggestions:  (1)  apply  data  minimization 
principle—do not leak information that is not required for processing the transaction; 
(2) inform customers about the data sharing in your privacy policy; (3) offer alternative, 
privacy-friendly payment methods; (4) use a payment gateway to prevent leakage of 
product URL via Referer header. 

Better privacy practices for handling online payments is not only desirable for end 
users, but also for the merchants and payment providers whose bussinesses depend on 
the users’ trust. At times when personal information is said to be new currency on the 
Web, it seems unfair that consumers are charged twice during checkout. 

References 

1.  J.  Valentino-DeVries  und  J.  Singer-Vine,  „They  Know  What  You're  Shopping  For,“  7 

December 2012. [Online]. Available: http://on.wsj.com/TQ8Dbi. 

2.  C. Duhigg, „How Companies Learn Your Secrets,“ 16 February 2012. [Online]. Available: 

http://nyti.ms/QbbTyS. 

3.  OECD, „The OECD Privacy Framework,“ 2013. 
4.  European  Commission,  „Proposal  for  a  Regulation  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on 
the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation),“ 2012. 

5.  PayPal, „About PayPal,“ 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.paypal-media.com/about. 
6.  J.  Bonneau  und  S.  Preibusch,  „The  Privacy  Jungle:  On  the  Market  for  Data  Protection  in 
Social  Networks,“  in  Eighth  Workshop  on  the  Economics  of  Information  Security  (WEIS), 
2009.  

7.  J. Bonneau und S. Preibusch, „The password thicket: technical and market failures in human 
authentication  on  the  web,“  in  Ninth  Workshop  on  the  Economics  of  Information  Security 
(WEIS), 2010.  

8.  S.  Preibusch  und  J.  Bonneau,  „The  privacy  landscape:  product  differentiation  on  data 
collection,“ in Economics of Information Security and Privacy III, Springer, 2013, pp. 263--
283. 

9.  B. Krishnamurthy und C. E. Wills, „On the leakage of personally identifiable information via 
online social networks,“ in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM workshop on Online social networks 
(WOSN), 2009.  

10.  A. Soltani, S. Canty, Q. Mayo, L. Thomas und C. J. Hoofnagle, „Flash Cookies and Privacy,“ 
in  Intelligent  Information  Privacy  Management,  Papers  from  the  2010  AAAI  Spring 
Symposium, Technical Report SS-10-05, 2010.  

11.  M. Ayenson, D. J. Wambach, A. Soltani, N. Good und C. J. Hoofnagle, „Flash Cookies and 

Privacy II: Now with HTML5 and ETag Respawning,“ SSRN, 2011. 

12.  G. Acar, C. Eubank, S. Englehardt, M. Juarez, A. Narayanan und C. Diaz, „The Web never 

forgets: Persistent tracking mechanisms in the wild,“ in Proceedings of CCS 2014, 2014.  

13.  P. Eckersley, „How unique is your web browser?,“ in Proceedings of the 10th international 

conference on Privacy enhancing technologies (PETS), 2010.  

14.  G. Acar, M. Juarez, N. Nikiforakis, C. Diaz, S. Gürses und F. a. P. B. Piessens, „FPDetective: 
Dusting the web for fingerprinters,“ in Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference on 
Computer & communications security, 2013.  

15.  J. Y. Tsai, S. Egelman, L. Cranor und A. Acquisti, „The Effect of Online Privacy Information 
on Purchasing Behavior: An Experimental Study,“ Information Systems Research, 22(2), pp. 
254--268, 2011.  

16.  N. Jentzsch, S. Preibusch und A. Harasser, „Study on monetising privacy. An economic model 
for  pricing  personal  information,“  European  Network  and  information  Security  Agency 
(ENISA), 2012. 

17.  S. Preibusch, D. Kübler und A. R. Beresford, „Price versus privacy: an experiment into the 
competitive  advantage  of  collecting  less  personal  information,“  Electronic  Commerce 
Research, 13(4), pp. 423--455, 2013.  

18.  PayPal, „How would you like to integrate with PayPal?,“ 2013. [Online]. Available: https://

developer.paypal.com/webapps/developer/docs/. 

19.  PayPal,  „Getting  Started  With  Express  Checkout,“  2013.  [Online].  Available:  https://

developer.paypal.com/webapps/developer/docs/classic/express-checkout/integration-
guide/ECGettingStarted/. 

20.  PayPal,  „Legal  Agreements  for  PayPal  Services,“  2014.  [Online].  Available:  https://

www.paypal.com/us/webapps/mpp/ua/legalhub-full. 

21.  PayPal, „PayPal Developer Agreement,“ 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.paypal.com/

us/webapps/mpp/ua/xdeveloper-full. 

22.  PayPal, „SetExpressCheckout API Operation (NVP),“ 2014. [Online]. Available: https://dev

eloper.paypal.com/docs/classic/api/merchant/SetExpressCheckout_API_Operation_NVP. 

23.  mitmproxy  project,  „mitmproxy  0.9  -  Introduction,“  2013.  [Online].  Available:  http://

mitmproxy.org/doc/index.html. 

24.  A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird und D. B. Rubin, „Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data 
via the EM Algorithm,“ Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 
39(1), pp. 1--38, 1977.  

25.  Adobe Systems Incorporated, „Digital marketing | Adobe Marketing Cloud,“ 2014. [Online]. 

Available: http://www.adobe.com/solutions/digital-marketing.html. 

26.  Adobe  Systems  Incorporated,  „SiteCatalyst  variables  and  query  string  parameters,“  2014. 
[Online].  Available:  http://helpx.adobe.com/analytics/using/digitalpulse-debugger.html#
id_1298. 

27.  BuiltWith  Pty  Ltd,  „Websites  using  Omniture  SiteCatalyst,“  2014.  [Online].  Available: 

http://trends.builtwith.com/websitelist/Omniture-SiteCatalyst. 

28.  B. Krishnamurthy und C. Wills, „Privacy diffusion on the web: a longitudinal perspective,“ 

in Proceedings of the 18th international conference on World wide web (WWW), 2009.  

29.  PayPal, „Privacy Policy,“ 20 February 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.paypal.com/

webapps/mpp/ua/privacy-full. 

30.  R.  Singel,  „Online  Tracking  Firm  Settles  Suit  Over  Undeletable  Cookies,“  12  May  2010. 

[Online]. Available: http://www.wired.com/2010/12/zombie-cookie-settlement/. 

