Issues in Designing a Bitcoin-Like  

Community Currency 

David Vandervort, Dale Gaucas, and Robert St Jacques 

david.vandervort@xerox.com, dale.gaucas@xerox.com,  

robert.stjacques@xerox.com 

PARC, Webster, NY 

 

Abstract. The invention of the Bitcoin protocol has opened the door to new 
forms  of  financial  interaction.  One  such  form  may  be  to  adapt  Bitcoin 
technology  for  use  as  a  community  currency.  A  community  currency  is  a 
form of money issued by a non-government entity to serve the economic or 
social interests of a group of people, often in a small geographic area. We 
propose a model of a community cryptocurrency that includes a community 
fund from which community members may take out loans if the community 
votes to approve them. We consider possible vulnerabilities and mitigations 
to  issues  that  would  affect  this  community  fund,  including  issues  of 
identity,  voting  protocols  and  funds  management.  We  conclude  that  these 
vulnerabilities  are,  in  most  cases,  amenable  to  technological  mitigations 
that must be adaptable to both community values and changing conditions, 
emphasizing the need for careful currency design. 

1  Background 

Money  issued  by  national  governments  is  a  dominant  fixture  of  modern  economic 
exchange.  So  called  fiat  currency  is  freely  traded  for  goods  and  services,  with  its 
printing,  issue  and  acceptance  protected  by  law.  Bitcoin  and  its  derivatives  are  a 
different kind of currency, useable for many purchases despite being non-government 
issued  and  protected  by  no  law.  Community  currencies,  including  such  subtypes  as 
Local Exchange Trading Systems (LETS), time banks and business trade exchanges, 
are similar non-state issued moneys that circulate in parallel with fiat currencies [1]. 
Purposes of community currencies often go beyond economic exchange to supporting 
values and causes including social, environmental or ethical dimensions [2]. 

Examples  of  community  currencies  include  the  Brixton  Pound,  Ithaca  Hours  and 
BerkShares.  Each  serves  a  different  local  area  and  evinces  a  different  philosophy  of 
society  and  economics  in  its  construction.  Bitcoin  is  a  digital  currency  that  was 
developed in order to remove the need for a central authority (i.e. banks) to mediate 
and clear transactions and to protect the privacy of those engaging in transactions [3]. 
This is clearly also a philosophy. In a sense, Bitcoin can be regarded as a community 
currency, with the community being those people who care about Bitcoin. They have 
shown the ability to work together toward goals large and small, to hold informative 
discussions,  to  build  an  economy  and  to  help  each  other  in  times  of  need.  It  seems 
reasonable  then,  to  consider  ways  in  which  Bitcoin  technology  could  benefit  other 
communities. 

 

1.1  Cryptocurrencies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Because  of  its  use  of  cryptographic  methods  to  protect  the  integrity  of  transactions 
and  of  the  currency  itself,  Bitcoin  is  known  as  a  cryptocurrency.  Advantages  of 
Bitcoin  include  immutability  of  transactions,  pseudonymity,  distributed  control  that 
prevents  manipulation  by  a  central  authority,  complete  transparency  (as  anyone, 
anywhere  can  download  the  blockchain  and  view  all  transactions)  and  strong 
cryptographic protection against tampering.  

While  Bitcoin  was  the  first  cryptocurrency,  it  was  quickly  followed  by  an 
explosion  of  currencies  based  on  the  same  or  very  similar  technology.  There  are  a 
plethora  of  cryptocoins  available  besides  Bitcoin,  including  Litecoin,  Mastercoin, 
Primecoin, Marscoin, Zerocoin, Dogecoin, Reddcoin and many others. Many of these 
experiment  with  slight  differences  in  the  protocol  to  serve  perceived  needs  of  the 
community and the world. 

Bitcoin  is  a  software  based  system.  Bitcoin  transactions  manipulate  data  to 
exchange ownership of bitcoins between addresses, with no requirement for physical 
exchanges of notes or coins. This allows complex scripting of behaviors, such as m of 
n  (multi-signature)  transactions  and  smart  contracts  [4].  It  also  means  that  any 
behavior  that  can  be  expressed  in  code  can  theoretically  be  encoded  into  a  Bitcoin-
like  protocol.  If  this  is  true,  then  features  found  in  community  currencies  may  be 
added to Bitcoin to make something new. 

2 Community Cryptocurrency Features 

Community  currencies  include  features  beyond  direct  economic  value  that  are 
intended to advance their goals. Two important features for the present discussion are 
demurrage  and  the  maintenance  of  a  fund  for  loans  or  grants.  Demurrage  is  the 
practice of reducing the  value of currency  in proportion to the time it is  held, rather 
than  spent.  Reportedly,  the  “peanuts”  LETS  currency  in  Chiba  Prefecture  in  Japan 
charges  a  1%  fee  per  month  on  currency  that  is  not  used.  Demurrage  encourages 
people to keep circulating currency so as to avoid the loss of value. This is reportedly 
a  significant  factor  in  the  success  of  Peanuts  [5].  Note  that  the  velocity  of  a 
community currency (roughly, the number of times a single note or coin is re-spent in 
the  economy)  can  be  quite  high  and  demurrage  is  sometimes  cited  as  one  of  the 
reasons [6]. 

A  loan  or  grant  fund  is  possibly  one  of  the  most  powerful  tools  of  development 
possessed by community currencies. The BerkShares currency maintains a loan fund 
for local businesses [7]. It is not unusual for hours based systems such as Ithaca Hours 
and Calgary dollars also to provide small loans or outright grants to local businesses 
[8]. Small business loans can be a driver of economic development. As well, personal 
loans and grants can be tools for assisting those in need. Loans can also be targeted at 
types of businesses, or interest rates tailored to meet social as well as economic goals. 
Other  possible  features  for  community  currencies  include  restriction  to  a  small 
geographic  area  (geofencing),  privileged 
interest  payments  and 
participant dividends. Because the last two features must have a source of funds, their 

transactions, 

 

implementation will likely involve draws from the same fund as loans and grants. For 
that reason they will not be dealt with at length. The focus here is on the community 
loan and grant fund. For simplicity, this fund will be referred to in most instances as 
the community fund. 

There  have  been  several  forays  into  using  Bitcoin  technology  for  community 

currencies. Examples include the following. 
 

 

is 

  Mazacoin (http://mazacoin.org). Mazacoin claims to be the national currency 
of the Lakota Nation, though it is unclear from reports if the officials of the 
nation share this view. The creator of Mazacoin pre-mined 25 million coins 
(meaning he created them before allowing others to mine for their own) to be 
set  aside  for  a  tribal  fund  that  would  give  grants  to  individuals,  businesses 
and non-profits focused on the tribe [9]. 
IrishCoin  (http://IrishCoin.org/).  IrishCoin 
targeted  specifically  at 
promoting tourism to Ireland and has allocated 7% of the total volume of the 
coin  for  distribution  to  businesses  and  organizations  associated  with  that 
industry for use as a “discount token” [10]. 

  Marscoin (http://marscoin.org). This coin has the unusual goal of becoming 
the currency used by colonists on Mars1. Four hundred thousand coins were 
pre-mined and donated to the Mars Society, a not-for-profit organization that 
seeks to establish a colony on Mars. The eventual goal is for colonists to take 
the Marscoin blockchain with them to Mars and use it as the basis for a local 
economy [11]. 

These  and  similar  examples  of  community  cryptocurrencies  adapt  the  Bitcoin 
protocol  to  serve  their  needs  without  significant  new  features.  More  extensive 
adaptations  of  existing  Bitcoin  features  and  new  capabilities  can 
increase 
differentiation  and  utility  for  community  cryptocurrencies.  The  remainder  of  this 
paper will discuss integrating these extended features into a cryptocurrency so it may 
serve  an  individual  community.  A  significant  portion  will  be  devoted  to  a 
vulnerability analysis of the community fund and to methods of community decision 
making, centered around the community fund. 

2.1  Mining 

One  of  the  protections  Bitcoin  has  against  fraud  and  manipulation  is  that  coins  are 
created and transactions verified in a distributed manner. All the working nodes check 
each  other’s  work.  It  is,  however,  a  consensus  algorithm,  with  the  blockchain 
reflecting work that the majority of nodes agree on. This makes it vulnerable to what 
is  known  as  a  51%  attack.  In  this  attack,  one  person,  node  or  mining  pool  acquires 
enough power (possibly through having more or better hardware than other nodes) to 
force  a  consensus  on  its  own  terms.  Thus  this  powerful  unit  can  conceivably  corner 
the market on coin creation or even insert fraudulent transactions into the blockchain 
[12]. 

                                                
1 One of the authors of this paper (Vandervort) has mined Marscoin. His wallet currently holds 
321.824521 Marscoin. He has no plan to go to Mars. 

 

In  a  community  cryptocurrency  limits  to  the  participant  pool  imposed  by 
geography,  interest,  or  other  factors  may  increase  this  risk.  Careful  attention  must 
therefore be paid to the numbers of mining and verification nodes. It may be then that 
proof-of-stake  algorithms  may  be  safer  for  community  cryptocurrencies  than  the 
Bitcoin proof-of-work method. Proof-of-stake protocols require participants to prove 
possession  of  some  amount  of  the  currency  for  a  minimum  period  of  time  before 
being permitted to produce new blocks (and with them, new coins) [13]. One way of 
jump-starting this is for a small amount of currency to be automatically given to new 
members of the community, probably from the community fund. Membership may be 
determined  simply  by  downloading  a  new  wallet,  registering  a  new  identity 
(discussed below) or some other method.  

2.2  Geofencing 

Community  currencies  are  often  intended  to  serve  a  local  geographic  area. 
BerkShares  and  Ithaca  Hours  are  examples  of  these  kinds  of  community  currencies. 
Implementing  geographic  limitations  in  a  cryptocurrency  may  have  wide  ranging 
consequences and difficulties. 

Thanks to the revolution in geopositioning systems (GPS), software can be aware 
of  the  location  where  it  is  being  used.  This  is  not  universal  as  location  is  often 
considered  private  data  and  many  people  block  it  by  default.  For  a  community 
cryptocurrency,  location  data  can  be  used  to  verify  the  location  of  transactions  and 
even  software  downloads.  However,  locations  can  be  spoofed,  for  example  by 
accessing a download site through a virtual private network. The question of how to 
handle offline transactions,  which  may experience delays before being committed to 
the  blockchain  is  also  an  issue,  since  verification  of  location  information  may  not 
necessarily occur at the time of the transaction. 

Even  putting  aside  the  possibility  of  spoofing  IP  addresses  and  other  location 
identifiers,  there  are  issues  with  geofencing  a  digital  currency.  Enforcing  the 
restrictions  means  forcing  both  businesses  that  accept  the  currency  and  users  who 
spend it to reveal location information. Many may find this intrusive and the pool of 
available users will then be reduced accordingly. The size of the area and the mobility 
of people within it is also an issue. What happens to someone who travels outside the 
area briefly then realizes a bill needs to be paid? Is the payment prevented from going 
through  until  the  payer  returns  home?  There  are  many  other  cases  that  could  be 
imagined in which geographic restrictions are an impediment even to people who live 
and  work  within the assigned area. Softer restrictions that  allow transactions outside 
the  defined  area  seem  more  supportable  but  risk  allowing  the  area  to  artificially 
widen. This may not be a disadvantage in practice as it allows the pool of participants 
to widen as well.  

Mining  for  new  coins  is  a  different  question.  Should  this  be  allowed  outside  the 
intended area? If communities answer yes, they run the risk that outsiders will come 
to dominate  mining, removing control of the currency from  its intended community. 
If, however, they discourage this option, the total number of mining nodes may be too 
low  to  keep  the  currency  stable  or  to  fend  off  attempts  to  take  over  51%  of  the 
processing power.  

 

It  can  be  seen  then,  that  enforcing  geographic  limits  at  the  protocol  or  software 
levels  may  create  complications  for  a  currency  and  its  users.  This  indicates  that  the 
best  course  may  be  for  real  human  beings  to  concentrate  on  working  with  their 
neighbors and with local businesses to make their currency popular in the local region 
rather  than  to  use  technology  to  enforce  geographic  restrictions.  Therefore,  at  the 
current  time  geofencing  related  features  are  not  recommended  for  community 
cryptocurrencies. 

2.3  Privileged Transactions 

Privileged  transactions  are  those  that  the  community  encourages  by  providing  extra 
incentives. These transactions are considered to advance community goals or express 
community  values. Examples include giving bonus payments  for services performed 
for  the  elderly,  or  discounts  for  purchases  of  environmentally  friendly  products.  In 
each case, for the economic equation to work, the difference between the normal price 
and the privileged price must be made up from somewhere. The most logical source 
for these additional funds is the community fund (discussed below).  

As  a  direct  expression  of  the  community’s  values,  privileged  transactions  are  a 
means  of  fostering  community  cohesion.  Including  this  feature  in  a  digital  currency 
requires  some  method  of  indicating  what  types  of  transactions  would  be  privileged 
and  how  much  privilege  they  would  receive.  Privileges  expressed  numerically,  such 
as  discounts  and  bonuses,  are  the  simplest  to  translate  into  rules  that  can  be 
interpreted by software. Less deterministic privileges, such as a promise of invitations 
to dinner at some time in the future, might be specified by text strings but automating 
verification  of  their  delivery  is  difficult.  The  Bitcoin  protocol  may  enable  creative 
solutions to this problem. For example, a promise of dinner can be encoded as a very 
small multi-signature transaction, that is completed when all parties are satisfied that 
the  promise  has  been  kept.  Verification  of  some  sort  is  important  for  the  sake  of 
transparency. When users can check in the blockchain to see that promises are being 
kept, their faith in the currency and the community is likely to be greater than cases 
where there is no such verification.  

The problem of verification brings up another issue that is important to the design 
and  function  of  a  community  currency:  trust.  In  some  communities,  methods  of 
verification might be relaxed as a show of trust among community members. In such 
communities  it  might  be  enough  for  someone  to  send  an  email  to  one  of  the 
community leaders describing the privileged transactions they have been involved in 
and asking for bonuses thus earned. Particularly in small groups where the members 
have  considerable  face-to-face  contact  this  kind  of  informality  may  be  acceptable. 
Whether  this  type  of  small,  trusting  community  needs  a  cryptocurrency  is  another 
question.  In  any  case,  the  ability  to  automatically  adjust  compensation  for  different 
types of transactions and to verify the accuracy and nature of payments is a significant 
advantage  of  software-based  systems  over  more  traditional  paper  currencies  or  even 
many  electronic  exchanges.  The  convenience  of  having  an  account  automatically 
credited  by  the  correct  amount  the  moment  the  transaction  takes  place,  rather  than 
having  to  go  to  a  local  “bank”  and  exchange  notes  or  access  a  website  and  enter 

 

verification  details  is  a  significant  advantage  of  a  Bitcoin-based  model  for  these 
currencies. 

2.4  Demurrage 

In  order  to  encourage  economic  transactions,  some  currencies  use  demurrage, 
meaning they reduce the value of unspent notes over time. This gives people holding 
them incentive  to  move them quickly in order to capture as  much  value as possible. 
This  in  turn  may  magnify  the  economic  multiplier  effect  (or  velocity)  of  such 
currencies.  Though  many  factors  may  affect  the  velocity  of  a  currency,  demurrage 
appears  to  have  been  at  least  somewhat  effective  for  several  community  currencies 
[14] making it a potentially desirable feature. 

Administering  demurrage  means  that  the  time  of  transfer  of  each  note  must  be 
recorded  so  that  the  value  can  be  properly  calculated.  In  the  physical  world,  this 
means that either a note must have a timestamp (or series of timestamps) on its face, 
or  it  must  have  an  identifier  such  as  a  serial  number  that  can  be  associated  with  the 
timestamps  in  a  central  registry.  This  second  method  of  tracking  time  for  notes  and 
transactions  is  similar  to  the  function  of  the  Bitcoin  blockchain,  which  directly 
incorporates timestamps into transaction block data [3]. There are, however, potential 
pitfalls. Differences in time zones, system clocks and even the representation of time 
in  different  programming  languages  may  make  it  impractical  to  calculate  reductions 
in value over short periods of time. Recalculating the value of a particular coin should 
probably be done on a scale of days or weeks rather than seconds or minutes.  

It is essential, also, that changes in the value of currency be verified at the mining 
level, similar to the way transactions are incorporated into the blockchain. In fact, the 
simplest implementation is to remove some portion of currency at the time it is used 
and  deposit  that  portion  into  the  community  fund.  This  implementation  prevents 
unintentional  destruction  of  the  total  value  of  the  currency,  which  could  adversely 
affect the stability of the currency over time. It could also help to keep the balance of 
the community fund healthy. 

The  question  arises  of  the  relationship  between  demurrage  and  a  proof-of-stake 
system. One of the advantages of proof-of-stake is that it may allow anyone who has a 
stake  to  mine  new  coins.  Typically,  coins  must  be  shown  not  just  to  exist  but  to  be 
reasonably  "fresh"  [13].  If  the  rate  at  which  demurrage  removes  value  is  too  fast,  it 
could  then  interfere  with  the  ability  to  show  stake,  both  by  directly  removing  coins 
that  would  otherwise  show  stake  and  by  encouraging  people  to  spend  their  coins  so 
quickly  that  they  have  little  or  no  stake  in  their  wallets  for  verification.  Yet,  if 
demurrage  is  too  slow,  it  provides  little  incentive  for  people  to  spend  their  coins, 
defeating its purpose. Thus if both proof-of-stake and demurrage are implemented in 
the  same  currency,  the  rate  of  change  must  be  carefully  calibrated  to  encourage 
spending while preserving stake2. 
                                                
2 As of this writing (September 2014), a USPTO patent application #20130346164, “Peer-to-
peer (p2p) currency platform implementing demurrage,” may affect implementations of 
demurrage. The application can be viewed at http://appft1.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-
Parser?Sect1=PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PG01&p=1&u=/netahtml/PTO/srchnum.html&r=1&
f=G&l=50&s1=20130346164.PGNR . 

 

Related  to  demurrage  is  the  payment  of  interest,  which  increases  holdings  over 
time  rather  than  decreasing  them.  The  money  to  pay  interest  must  come  from  some 
source. That source is most probably the community fund. Interest incentivizes saving 
rather  than  spending,  which  may  not  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the  community 
economy.  However,  it  also  provides  clear  value,  which  may  improve  trust  in  the 
community. It can be used to demonstrate proof-of-stake by adding "fresh" currency 
to a wallet. Variation in interest rates, such as a reduction in interest payments when 
the community fund has a low balance, may offset the benefits, however.  

2.5  The Community Loan Fund 

Some community currencies maintain a fund that can be used to make small grants or 
loans, usually for the purposes of starting or improving small businesses. Such funds 
can  be  effective  at  building  owner-operated  businesses  [15],  therefore  incorporation 
of  loans  or  grants  into  a  community  currency  may  contribute  toward  community 
goals. There are two questions to consider in designing this capability. Where do the 
funds  come  from,  and  how  are  decisions  made  concerning  their  disbursement?  We 
propose that the answers to both questions be incorporated directly into the currency 
software. 

2.5.1  Adding to the Community Fund 

In  cryptocurrencies,  the  most  common  method  of  stocking  the  community  fund  is 
currently  for  the  creator(s)  to  pre-mine  some  amount  that  they  can  keep  under  their 
control. This method is easy to implement by simply running the first mining node or 
a small number of such nodes, without allowing others to download the software and 
run  their  own  nodes,  until  a  sum  deemed  sufficient  has  been  mined.  The 
cryptocurrency  community  in  general  tends  to  frown  on  this  practice  since  it  allows 
an  unscrupulous  operator  to  introduce  a  currency  that  they  control  from  the  very 
beginning. Note again the issue of trust comes into play. 

It is possible for cryptocurrencies to add coins to a general fund in other ways, for 
example by adding a small fee to all transactions, or to all transactions above a certain 
amount,  which  will be paid to an address associated  with  the  fund. In a corollary to 
privileged  transactions,  it  may  be  possible  to  charge  an  extra  fee  for  discouraged 
transactions,  such  as  buying  gasoline,  if  the  goals  of  the  community  are 
environmentally  oriented.  The  Bitcoin  protocol  already  uses  transaction  fees  as  a 
means of compensating miners. Adding another fee or increasing the fee slightly and 
splitting between two recipients are relatively simple modifications that can support a 
community fund without pre-mining. 

A  related  method  of  adding  currency  to  the  community  fund  is  to  take  a  small 
portion of mining rewards for the fund. In current cryptocurrencies, a node that is the 
first to generate a solution for a block is given a reward in new coins. This is called 
mining  the  currency.  In  the  Bitcoin  network  the  current  reward  is  25  bitcoins  per 
block. In a community cryptocurrency, splitting off a portion of the block reward for 
the  community  fund  is  feasible.  Miner  objections  may  be  reduced  if  the  amount 

 

remaining to them is enough for a profit, or if they perceive some other benefit such 
as a good reputation within the community. The reputation factor could be enhanced 
by allowing miners to adjust the amount deposited to the community fund, therefore 
making  it  more  a  donation  than  an  involuntary  side  effect.  Designers  of  community 
cryptocurrencies  may  find  it  advisable  to  set  a  minimum  donation,  rather  than 
depending entirely on the altruism of the miners. 

2.5.2  Disbursing From the Community Fund 

In  traditional  finance,  the  most  common  method  of  disbursing  funds  for  loans  and 
grants  has  been  for  a  small  number  of  administrative  persons  to  make  all  decisions. 
Even  in  community  currencies,  this  seems  to  be  the  default  approach.  So,  for 
example,  the  creators  of  IrishCoin  stocked  a  distribution  fund  by  pre-mining  and 
indicated  a  preference  for  distributing  it  to  businesses  and  organizations  associated 
with Irish tourism [10]. This approach requires no custom programming to implement 
in the current Bitcoin protocol. 

Another method can be built that uses the distributed nature of the protocol to take 
the  disbursement  out  of  the  hands  of  a  few  members  and  give  it  to  the  whole 
community.  This  would  involve  a  multi-step  process.  First,  a  transaction  of  a  new 
type, community loan, is created by any authorized user, which in many communities 
may  include  any  member  of  the  community.  The  amount  of  the  transaction  is  the 
amount  of  the  loan  (or  grant)  from  the  community  fund.  Then  members  of  the 
community submit transactions of another new type, vote. Each vote either approves 
or disapproves of the transaction. When a threshold is reached, the vote is finalized. If 
the  loan  is  approved  the  funds  are  released  to  the  address  specified.  If  the  loan  is 
disapproved,  the  transaction  is  invalidated.  The  voting  threshold  for  or  against  the 
loan will vary from community to community. Some will require a majority of voting 
members.  Others  will  require  a  supermajority.  Any  amount 
that  can  be 
mathematically described can be conceived.  

The  advantages  of  a  system  where  the  community  votes  on  the  disbursement  of 
funds  are  in  increased  trust  among  community  members  and  commensurately 
increased  investment  in  the  goals  and  activities  of  the  community.  There  are 
numerous  difficulties  created  by  the  proposed  system  as  well.  The  next  sections  of 
this  paper  will  discuss  the  problem  of  identifying  “voting”  members  of  the 
community  as  well  as  the  recipient  of  proposed  loans.  This  will  be  followed  by  a 
discussion of potential vulnerabilities to the integrity of the community fund. 

3  Challenges with a Cryptocurrency Community Fund 

The  community  fund  and  votes  concerning  loans  from  it  are  where  the  community 
works together, expressing shared values and building economic and social structures 
to make the community stronger. Conversely, should the loan fund become depleted 
or  weaknesses  in  the  system  of  proposing  and  voting  on  loans  develop,  the 
community  could  suffer  a  loss  of  trust,  cohesion  and  even  economic  viability.  Our 
analysis  identified  three  major  areas  where  design  must  be  carefully  considered  in 

 

order for a community fund regulated by community participation to be viable. Those 
areas  are  identification  of  community  members,  tallying  of  votes  and  regulation  of 
loans. The issues related to these factors are often interrelated.  

3.1  Identity 

The  original  Bitcoin  system  is  highly  successful  at  allowing  relatively  anonymous, 
trustless  transactions.  In  a  community  currency  there  are  at  least  three  reasons  why 
identity  might  be  revealed  to  some  extent.  It  may  be  necessary  to  ensure  the  proper 
counting of votes, to validate the recipient of grants and loans and to find businesses 
that will accept the currency in payment. Serving these purposes may require different 
levels of disclosure of identifying information. For example, while identifying a loan 
recipient  may  require  a  full  name  and  address,  voting  may  require  no  more  than  a 
unique identifier. In other cases, some third party identifier or certificate issued by a 
provider  who  possesses  but  does  not  share  more  specific  identification  information, 
may  be  a  good  compromise  between  the  extremes  of  full  identification  and  full 
anonymity.  

The  level  and  type  of  identifier  used  may  also  vary  depending  on  purposes. 
Businesses may prefer to be more open about their true name and location than people 
whose purpose is not business related. Registering clear identifying information as a 
public  identity  is  a  simple  form  of  advertising.  In  communities  with  a  strong  local 
component, geographic coordinates might also be part of an identifier.  

How  identity  data  is  stored  and  accessed  is  an  important  consideration.  Do 
identities need to be registered directly in the blockchain (or some blockchain) or is it 
enough to have some identifier such as a username associated with a wallet address? 
Could  a  separate  blockchain  for  identity  be  used,  with  transaction  meta-data 
incorporating  a  hash  of  a  location  in  the  identity  chain?  In  this  case,  is  it  enough  to 
reference  identities  registered  with  some  service  such  as  Namecoin?  While  this  low 
level of identification is suitable for many purposes, it seems likely that a higher level 
of  disclosure  is  required  in  communities  that  vote  on  local  issues,  or  in  which 
reputation is important. 

3.2  Voting 

Voting is integral to the model of community currency being developed here. Voting 
is one way that people participate in the community which ties it closely to identity. 
In  order  to  verify  that  only  people  who  belong  to  the  community  cast  votes,  voters 
must be identified in some way. If, however, the community requires votes to be cast 
in secret, verification and tallying become separate steps. When using a structure such 
as  a  blockchain  to  store  votes,  meeting  the  goals  of  both  secrecy  and  identity 
verification is a difficult technical problem.  

In  the  physical  world,  voting  is  usually  restricted  to  a  specific  time  period.  This 
makes  sense  especially  when  dealing  with  monetary  loans,  which  may  be  time 
sensitive.  Rules  for  determining  winning  and  losing  vary  with  locality  and  context. 
For a political election, the highest  number of votes  may  win, or a  majority (>50%) 

 

may be required with lower numbers resulting in a runoff. In a jury, unanimity may be 
required. In a legislature,  some actions  may pass by  majority  vote  while others  may 
require a supermajority. An additional concept to consider is the need for a quorum. 
This  is  the  smallest  number  or  percentage  of  the  membership  that  must  vote  for 
results  to  be  considered  valid.  Without  a  reasonable  number  for  a  quorum,  a 
community  risks  having  its  resources  come  under  the  control  of  a  small  number  of 
members.  All  of  these  properties  can  be  modeled  in  the  community  cryptocurrency 
software.  As  discussed  above,  votes  are  treated  in  this  system  as  another  form  of 
transaction.  Therefore,  mining  nodes  may  apply  rules  to  voting  transactions  and 
voting  blocks  as  the  community  requires,  though  choosing  optimal  values  may  be 
challenging. 

3.3  Loan Regulation 

In order for a loan fund to be viable, it  must  not loan out  more currency  than it  has 
coming  in  and  loans  must  be  paid  back  in  a  timely  manner.  The  way  loans  are 
proposed  to  and  approved  by  the  community  influences  these  factors.  Communities 
should  consider  factors  such  as  who  is  allowed  to  propose  loans.  Should  anyone  be 
allowed or should it be restricted to members in good standing? Does a proposed loan 
have  to  be  seconded  before  it  is  put  up  for  a  vote  to  the  whole  community?  Should 
there  be  a  maximum  size  to  loans  either  in  whole  numbers  or  a  percentage  of 
available  funds?  Should  loan  recipients  be  allowed  to  receive  new  loans  while  a 
previous loan has not yet been paid back?  

There must be some  method of stocking the community loan fund.  As  mentioned 
above,  methods  include  taking  tithes  from  transactions  or  from  miners.  There  may 
also  be  a  tax  on  wallet  balances  above  a  certain  amount  or  membership  fees  for 
businesses.  Whatever  method  is  used  to  fill  the  fund,  it  must  be  carefully  balanced 
with  outgoing  loans.  If  the  community  fund  becomes  too  large  it  may  stifle  other 
economic activity effectively creating deflation. If it is too small, loans will be choked 
off and economic growth may suffer. 

In addition to the need to encode policy into software comes the question of how to 
change  policy.  Any  policy  may  need  to  be  revised  to  accommodate  real  world 
experiences.  Perhaps  if  too  many  loans  default,  a  temporary  cap  needs  to  be  put  in 
place, or certain members need to be permanently banned from proposing or receiving 
loans or grants. Creating a system that is comprehensive, secure and also responsive is 
a significant challenge for both currency designers and software developers.  

4  Vulnerability Assessment 

While  Bitcoin  transactions  provide  a  level  of  protection  of  user  identity,  in  a 
community  fund  this  may  be  compromised  to  some  extent.  Businesses,  including 
those operated by the self-employed, may desire more visibility to the community in 
order to advertise their services and so their names may accrue a good reputation. The 
counting of votes is tied to identity as well. Vote tallies must be accurate and, in many 
communities,  secret,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  will  of  the  community  as  to  the 

 

disbursement of funds is not subverted. Similarly, the regulation of loans refers to the 
way in which loans are proposed, disbursed and even repaid.  

In  a  community  in  which  all  the  members  know  and  trust  each  other,  these 
problems  may  be  ignored.  In  more  common  communities  where  self-interest 
sometimes  conflicts  with  the  community  interest,  controls  are  needed  to  mitigate 
potential  risks.  We  analyze  the  risks  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  STRIDE 
framework,  slightly  modified  to  accommodate  analysis  at  the  fund  operation  level 
rather than at the point of software implementation.  

4.1  STRIDE Framework 

STRIDE is an acronym for a common set of risks to software-based systems. It stands 
for Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Information disclosure, Denial of service and 
Elevation  of  Privilege  [16].  Our  analysis,  however,  is  not  of  the  software 
implementation but of potential risks at the community fund level, as the structure of 
the system must be determined before being implemented in software. Therefore we 
use  the  terms,  plus  one  other,  for  structural  issues  that  may  impact  fund  operations. 
This gives the following categories for the analysis. 
– Spoofing. When a person pretends to be another, the pretend identity is said to be 
spoofed.  In  this  case,  one  person  may  spoof  multiple  identities  and  control  multiple 
votes. Those identities may be created by the person who controls them or they may 
be  hijacked  from  other  users.  This  is  not  an  issue  for  normal  Bitcoin  transactions, 
which do not support personal identifiers. 
– Tampering. When transactions are changed after a user believes they are finalized, 
they have been tampered with. It is assumed that the nature of the Bitcoin blockchain 
will provide strong protection for completed transactions, including votes. This issue 
is  therefore  most  prevalent  at  the  software  and  communication  levels  and  is  not 
considered here. 
–  Repudiation.  When  a  person  rejects  a  transaction  they  have  allegedly  made  they 
have repudiated that transaction. In standard Bitcoin practice, the blockchain provides 
strong  protection  against  this  as  well.  However,  because  the  community  system 
introduces a level of identity that is not present in the baseline Bitcoin protocol, there 
may be issues with repudiation here, particularly in voting.  
–  Information  disclosure.  Like  repudiation  and  spoofing,  the  introduction  of  user 
identity  creates  the  possibility  of  more  personal  information  leaking  than  intended. 
This is highly sensitive to how much identity information a given community requires 
from its members. This is purely an implementation issue, not considered below. 
–  Denial  of  service.  At  the  fund  level,  denial  of  service  means  that  the  community 
fund  is  depleted.  In  some  communities  this  may  be  seen  as  only  a  temporary 
inconvenience.  In  others  it  may  be  a  catastrophe.  At  some  level,  funds  must  be 
maintained. 
–  Elevation  of  privilege.  When  someone  is  able  to  access  funds  which  they  do  not 
have  the right to use, or to propose loans or open or close voting  when they are  not 
designated as having that authority, they are said to have elevated their privilege. This 
is very sensitive to community standards. 

 

–  Operational.  In  addition  to  the  STRIDE  categories  described  above,  we  use  the 
operational  category  to  show  risks  that  may  be  aggravated  or  mitigated  by  the  way 
community cryptocurrency features, such as voting, are designed.  

Dropping the unused categories and adding the one new one, modifies the STRIDE 
framework to SRDEO. While less mnemonically satisfying, this is at least a good start 
on  developing  a  framework  for  analyzing  the  structural  weaknesses  in  a  community 
cryptocurrency. 

4.2 The Vulnerability Matrix 

Using  the  SRDEO  categories,  and  the  classifications  of  voting,  identity  or  loan 
problems,  we  have  developed  the  matrix  of  potential  problems  in  designing  a 
community currency seen in table 1 (below). This list is not considered exhaustive but 
should  contain  the  most  prominent  risks  that  must  be  considered  when  designing  a 
currency for community use. 
 

Table 1: Vulnerability matrix 

Effect 
Small coalition controls 
funds. 

Mitigation strategy 
None (community has 
failed). 

Category 
Identity 

 

 

 

Voting 

 

 

 

Issue 
Too few 
registered users 
(O). 
Too many 
registered users 
(O). 
Spoofed 
identities (S, R, 
E). 
Abandoned IDs 
(O). 
Voter turnout 
too high (D). 

No quorum, no completed 
votes. 

People propose and vote on 
loans for themselves. 

No quorum, no completed 
votes. 
If people are paid to vote, 
this could deplete funds. 

Voter turnout 
too low (O). 

No quorum, no completed 
votes. 

Voter turnout 
too low due to 
apathy (O). 

No quorum, no completed 
votes, few loan proposals. 

Voter turnout 
low due to 
confusion about 
issues (O). 

No quorum, no completed 
votes, voter dissatisfaction. 

Adjust quorum rules 
to accept lower 
percentages of voters. 
Require identity 
confirmation. 

Require proof of 
activity for voting. 
Do not pay for votes 
or reduce payments 
once quorum is 
reached. 
Time limit voting 
period and reduce or 
eliminate quorum 
rules. 
Pay for votes. May 
pay for the first n 
votes or for votes in 
first t minutes or 
choose random 
sample of voters to be 
paid. 
 
Require proposal 
summaries; use 
wallets or other means 
to support information 

 

 

 

Loans 

 

 

 

Too many 
proposals to 
vote on (D). 

Depleted funds, not enough 
votes on individual items. 

Falsified votes 
(S). 
Not repaid (O). 

Too many loans 
(D). 

See spoofed IDs. 

Funds depleted. 

Funds depleted. 

Too few loans 
(O). 

Community loses 
credibility. 

Too few 
transactions (O). 

Funds depleted. 

dissemination and 
debate. 
Limit number of 
concurrent proposals 
or pay for votes on 
items that have not 
reached quorum. 
See spoofed IDs. 

Garnish payments 
after some time limit. 
Set a maximum level 
of concurrent loans 
and/or increase 
interest rates. 
Reduce interest rates. 
Pay dividends to all 
community members. 
Introduce demurrage, 
transaction fees or 
request donations. 

4.3 Mitigations  

Multiple  issues  flow  from  insecure  identity  implementations.  If  a  small  number  of 
people  can  control  a  large  number  of  votes  -  that  is  more  than  one  each  -  they  can 
dictate  who gets loans, including  steering loans to themselves and their friends. One 
partial solution to this is to require that the identity of new voting members be verified 
by some number of previously existing members. It is a partial solution because it can 
never  be  guaranteed  that  those  who  provide  verification  will  perform  due  diligence, 
such as meeting new members face to face, or that they will not be fooled. Therefore 
this  is  only  a  first  level  of  protection.  Some  method  of  revoking  voting  privileges 
should exist as well, though this could also introduce the potential for problems if not 
carefully  handled.  Methods  of  temporarily  suspending  voting  rights,  loan  proposal 
and loan receipt rights may also be necessary to police issues.  

Controls can also be built that take note of community participation. For example, 
someone who has not posted a transaction of any kind within the last 30 days could be 
barred  from  voting  or  from  proposing  loans.  This  should  discourage  the  creation  of 
membership  accounts  solely  intended  to  influence  votes.  There  is  a  risk  with  this 
method that too many users will be barred if transaction volumes drop too low. This 
likely  cannot  be  remedied  by  automatically  or  even  manually  adjusting  the  time 
period to allow more to vote. When participation is too low, the remedies are social. 
The community needs to be encouraged to participate more. 

The  problem  of  too  frequent  or  too  large  loans  is  more  readily  amenable  to 
software  controls.  With  guidance  from  the  world  of  banking  and  finance,  formulae 
can  be  developed  to  balance  loans  that  are  being  repaid,  those  that  are  not  and  the 
funds available to make more loans. The performance of the loan fund can be scored 

 

and  loan  proposals  compared  with  currently  advisable  amounts  before  voting  is 
allowed.  

The  danger  of  underperforming  loans  in  community  currencies  is  significant, 
especially if the community includes assisting the poor among its values. To at least 
partially offset this, repayment terms can be automated, for example garnishing 1% of 
every transaction which the loan recipient receives until the loan is repaid. This may 
be more reliable than mandating manual monthly payments.  

Interest  rates  on  community  loans  are  often  low  or  non-existent  [6].  If  the  loan 
fund is low or the proposed loan high, a prudent policy  might be to charge a higher 
rate  of  interest  than  at  other  times.  This  would  discourage  depletion  of  the  fund  as 
well  as  bringing  in  extra  revenue  to  rebuild  it.  Again,  this  can  be  expressed  in 
software easily.  

The mitigation efforts described here may be implemented in various ways to meet 
the  needs  and  expectations  of  various  communities.  However,  unless  a  community 
has  perfect  trust,  the  issues  described  must  be  considered  and  controls  decided  on 
before the currency is launched. 

5  Conclusion and Future Research 

It  has  been  shown  here  that,  while  Bitcoin  technology  is  a  good  fit  for  use  as  a 
community currency, significant modifications to the protocol are needed as well. The 
needs  of  a  community  cryptocurrency  are  more  social,  requiring  degrees  of  identity 
and  fiduciary  care  not  found  in  the  pseudonymous  world  of  Bitcoin.  These  needs 
produce  their  own  opportunities  for  economic  engagement  and  community  cohesion 
while also generating  significant risks  for collapse of a community  using a currency 
with a flawed design. We discussed three major vulnerability areas in the community 
fund of a community cryptocurrency. In almost all cases we found possible mitigation 
strategies that could be built into the cryptocurrency software. The operation of these 
mitigations  in  practice  and  ways  to  adapt  them  to  community  values  and  changing 
conditions are important areas for future research.  

While  the  modified  STRIDE  framework  (SRDEO)  makes  a  promising  start  on  a 
method of analyzing the structure of community cryptocurrencies, improvements are 
possible. In particular the framework should consider attacks at the mining level, such 
as  Sybil  nodes  and  51%  type  attacks.  Whether  these  can  be  mitigated  by  requiring 
miners to provide a verifiable identity is an important question.  

Different models of identity, including those based on a model such as Namecoin 
and more complex, more deterministic measures should be implemented and their risk 
models  worked  out  in  detail.  Experimentation  with  different  loan  models,  such  as 
interest  bearing,  non-interest  bearing  and  multi-party,  as  well  as  differing  payback 
rates  and  garnished  and  voluntary  payments,  can  yield  unprecedented  information 
about financial dynamics and human financial behavior.  

The  concept  of  a  community  cryptocurrency  is  one  that  joins  the  financial, 
technological  and  social  worlds  in  new  ways.  Designing  a  currency  that  has  a 
reasonable  chance  of  working  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  effort.  In  this  paper  we 

 

have  tried  to  explore  the  most  important  variables  and  potential  features  at  a  high 
level. There are more levels and more variables still to be considered. 

 

References 

 

1.  About.  (n.d.).  International  Journal  of  Community  Currency  Research.  Retrieved 

September 2, 2014, from http://ijccr.net/about/ 

2.  Seyfang,  G.  (2002).  Tackling  social  exclusion  with  community  currencies:  learning 
from  LETS to Time banks. International Journal of Community  Currency Research, 
6(1), 1-11. 

3.  Nakamoto,  S.  (2008).  Bitcoin:  A  peer-to-peer  electronic  cash  system.  Consulted, 

1(2012), 28. 

4.  Butterin,  V.  (2014).  A  next-generation  smart  contract  and  decentralized  application 

platform. 

5.  Lietaer, B. (2004). Complementary currencies in Japan today: History, originality and 

relevance. International Journal of Community Currency Research, 8(1), 1-23. 

6.  Lietaer, B., & Hallsmith, G. (2006). Community currency guide. Global Community 
Initiatives.http://www.lyttelton.net.nz/timebank/Community%20Currency%20Guide. 
pdf. Accessed on July, 20, 2007. 

7.  Hess,  D.  J.  (2012).  An  Introduction  to  Localist  Movements.  of  the  American 

Sociological Association, Denver. 

8.  Mascornick, J. (2006). Local Currency Loans and Grants: Comparative Case Studies 
of  Ithaca  HOURS  and  Calgary  Dollars  (Doctoral  dissertation,  University  of 
Montana). 

9.  Ecoffey, Brandon. "Oglala Sioux Tribe surprised by MazaCoin plan." Indianz. Native 
2014. 

News, 

Web. 

Sept. 

2 

Sun 
http://www.indianz.com/News/2014/012781.asp. 

2014. 

Mar. 

7 

10.  "IrishCoin." 

IrishCoin.org. 

N.p., 

n.d.  Web. 

2 

Sept. 

2014. 

http://irishcoin.org/irishcoin.html. 

11.  BitcoinForMars.  Not  every  cause  needs  a  coin  but  every  planet  does  .  (n.d.). 

Retrieved September 2, 2014, from http://marscoin.org/ 

12.  Weaknesses. 

(2014,  August  2).  Retrieved  September  2,  2014, 

from 

https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Weaknesses#Attacker_has_a_lot_of_computing_power 

13.  Bentov,  I.,  Gabizon,  A.,  &  Mizrahi,  A.  (2014).  Cryptocurrencies  without  Proof  of 

Work. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5694. 

14.  De  la  Rosa,  J.  L.,  &  Stodder,  J.  (2013).  On  Velocity  in  Several  Complementary 
Currencies.  In  2nd  International  Conference  on  Complementary  and  Community 
Currencies Systems, The Hague. 

15.  Williams, C. C.,  Aldridge,  T., Lee, R., Leyshon, A.,  Thrift, N.,  &  Tooke, J. (2001). 
Bridges  into  work?  An  evaluation  of  local  exchange  and  trading  schemes  (LETS). 
Policy studies, 22(2), 119-132. 

16.  Shostack,  Adam.  Threat  Modeling:  Designing  for  Security.  Indianapolis,  IN:  John 

Wiley & Sons, 2014. 

 

