[Short Paper] The MVP Web-based

Authentication Framework

Sonia Chiasson, Chris Deschamps, Elizabeth Stobert,

Max Hlywa, Bruna Freitas Machado, Alain Forget,
Nicholas Wright, Gerry Chan, and Robert Biddle

Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada,

chiasson@scs.carleton.ca

Abstract. MVP is a framework allowing websites to use diverse knowledge-
based authentication schemes. One application is its use in conducting
ecologically valid user studies of authentication under the same experi-
mental conditions. We introduce MVP and its key characteristics, discuss
several authentication schemes, and oﬀer lessons learned from running 9
hybrid (lab/online) and 3 MTurk user studies over the last year.

Keywords: Authentication, usable security, graphical passwords, MTurk

1

Introduction

Despite the ubiquity of password systems, knowledge-based authentication re-
mains an important and active research area. Many current systems have low
security, and even then users often devise insecure coping strategies in order to
compensate for memorability and usability problems. Alternatives such as bio-
metrics or tokens raise other issues such as privacy and loss. Various graphical
password schemes have received considerable attention in response. A systematic
review of the literature on graphical passwords [8] shows no consistency in the
usability and security evaluation of diﬀerent schemes. The situation is similar
for text passwords, making fair comparison between schemes nearly impossible.
We present MVP (Multiple Versatile Passwords), a framework for using di-
verse knowledge-based authentication schemes on websites. In particular, it al-
lows user studies of authentication in the same context. These can be deployed in
the ﬁeld where ecological validity is improved by the use of real websites with real
content, making authentication a secondary task. MVP is not a single-sign-on
system; it serves as a platform for diﬀerent types of authentication and therefore
facilitates research in this area. Another testing framework for authentication
was described brieﬂy in a workshop paper by Beautement and Sasse [7]. It asked
users to log in to claim credits as part of an online bartering game.

We have implemented several authentication schemes within MVP and so
far have conducted 12 user studies with the system. We have also used it as
a classroom platform for students to gain experience in running user studies.
Amongst the schemes, we oﬀer an implementation of Draw-A-Secret (DAS) [14],

Fig. 1. Diagram of the MVP framework.

a recall-based graphical password scheme that to our knowledge has only been
tested as a paper prototype. Our implementations of the cued-recall schemes
PassPoints [16] and Persuasive Cued Click-Points [10] are the ﬁrst in the litera-
ture to include fully functional systems using discretization, hashing, and image
selection. The MVP implementations of recognition-based schemes such as Face
(similar to the commercial Passfaces system) are the ﬁrst to be implemented at
password-level security strength rather than PIN-level security.

2 MVP system features

MVP has the following system characteristics:

Web-based usage: MVP is web-based (e.g., as a Wordpress plug-in) and
functions with most popular browser and operating system conﬁgurations, there-
fore allowing participants to access the sites from any computer. The only mod-
iﬁcations necessary are to server-side software, and these are minor. No modiﬁ-
cations are needed on users’ computers.

Easy addition of new schemes: Figure 1 presents MVP’s design. The
website’s password ﬁeld is replaced by a button that invokes the MVP dispatcher
and opens a new window with the appropriate authentication scheme. The dis-
patcher returns a password string based on the user input that is evaluated by
the website as it would normally evaluate any entered text password. In this way,
the websites remain responsible for authentication, while MVP controls which
password scheme is displayed and its conﬁguration.

MVP is designed for interchangeable use of diﬀerent password schemes. The
schemes are modular components that administrators can add and remove like
server plug-ins. Password systems can be written in any web language. Currently,
the password systems are written in either Java or JavaScript. The password
schemes use PHP to communicate with the MVP dispatcher. A mySQL database
stores administrative data to support the schemes.

MVP allows for easy parameterization of schemes so they may be used at dif-
ferent levels of security. User accounts are initially deﬁned by an administrator,
who selects the authentication scheme and the desired parameters for the web-
site. A user may be assigned diﬀerent schemes for diﬀerent sites. Tools facilitate

the process of deﬁning multiple accounts. By default, a simple plain-text pass-
word system is used. However, modules for other schemes can easily be written
and added to MVP. Currently, password schemes include PassPoints [16], Cued
Click-Points [9], Persuasive Cued Click-Points [10], Draw-a-Secret [14], GrID-
sure [3], PassTiles [15]; and recognition-based schemes using face, object, house,
and word images. As well, MVP supports various text password systems.

Ecological validity: MVP is especially designed to allow passwords to be
deployed and accessed by users in their regular environments over longer periods
of time. The system allows authentication to become a secondary task, by sup-
porting primary tasks on real websites that require users to log in as part of the
process. This allows the collection of more realistic usage data. MVP exists as
a Wordpress plugin for blogs. We have also modiﬁed instances of other popular
open-source systems, including phpBB forums, OSCommerce online stores, and
the MediaWiki platform. Figure 2 provides a screenshot of the login interface
for a Wordpress blog using PCCP as an authentication scheme, while Figure 3
shows the DAS, Face, and Word Recognition login interfaces.

Fig. 2. A blog using PCCP for authentication.

Instrumentation for analysis: Since user behaviour can signiﬁcantly im-
pact security, we collect and analyze data representing user choices and behaviour
for susceptibility to security threats as well as for evaluating usability. MVP is in-
strumented to record all user interactions, including keyboard and mouse entries,
timestamps, and details of the user’s computing environment. Logging is done
asynchronously with the server, allowing detailed data to be collected without
creating delays aﬀecting user experience. Data is stored in a mySQL database.
Diﬀerent authentication schemes can be tested under identical conditions while
recording the same performance measures. We use LimeSurvey [4] running on
our servers in conjunction with MVP to administer study questionnaires.

Password reset without admin intervention: Forgotten passwords are
to be expected, especially in long-term studies or studies requiring users to re-
member multiple passwords. MVP allows users to reset forgotten passwords
without intervention from a system administrator. The real-time password re-

set mechanism minimizes disruption to users, encourage completion of assigned
tasks, and supports the ecological validity of the system. MVP records details
about password resets to allow later analysis of this user behaviour.

Password resets are triggered by clicking the “forgot password” link on the
given website. When a user resets their password, they are emailed a URL that
directs them to the website, where they are prompted to choose a new password
with their assigned authentication scheme. In some cases, it can be desirable to
discourage users from resetting their password each time they want to log in.
MVP allows password resets to be delayed by any period of time (typically 5
minutes, and the user is warned about the delay). This time delay is intended to
subtly discourages users from relying on password resets as a login mechanism.

Fig. 3. The Face, DAS, and Word Recognition login interfaces.

Training: MVP provides an interface for users to practice using new schemes
and receive immediate feedback about whether they are entering passwords cor-
rectly. MVP also supports audio/video tutorials, interactive demo systems, and
static text/image help pages. Some schemes (e.g., PassTiles) include the option
of practicing passwords directly within the password creation interface where
users can show/hide their password and practice it until it is memorized.

Administration tools: MVP includes several study administration tools.
A notiﬁcation system automates the process of emailing participants at speciﬁc
intervals prompting them to complete at-home tasks. A log query system allows
experimenters to retrieve information in real-time from the database about the
activities of speciﬁc users. While experiments are in-progress, the query system
is especially useful to monitor whether users are completing tasks and to trou-
bleshoot any problems from users. A modiﬁed version of the MRBS [5] scheduling
software allows in-person participants to sign-up for study sessions.

Crowdsourcing functionality: Online crowdsourcing websites (such as
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [1] — MTurk) are increasingly used as a source of
participants for usable security studies, and MVP includes tools to help con-
duct studies using such systems. Crowdsourcing studies diﬀer from traditional
studies in the volume of system traﬃc, the pace of the study, and the methods
of communication and payment. An MVP validation protocol veriﬁes that the
correct tasks have been completed, and users must validate their work to receive
payment for that session. MVP tracks user identiﬁers from the crowdsourcing

site (e.g., MTurk worker ID) and email addresses to reduce the possibility that a
user participates multiple times in the same study or in closely related studies.
The system also ensures that users cannot join partway through a multi-task
study without having completed earlier steps.

3 MVP deployment for user studies

MVP has been deployed for 12 user studies over the last year (see Table 1). To
situate the “Lessons Learned” from Section 4, we brieﬂy describe their methodol-
ogy and overall results. MVP was also used in a university course to give students
a platform for learning about user studies. Seventy students in 8 groups ran user
studies with approximately 200 participants overall.

3.1 Hybrid studies

We ran several hybrid studies of authentication systems. Participants initially
took part in a lab session where they received training on how to use the websites
and authentication schemes, and created accounts on two to four websites. The
accounts were for various Wordpress blogs (e.g., a dream vacation photo blog,
and a daily opinion poll site), and a phpBB forum to discuss the best locations for
various activities. The websites were fully populated with real content to engage
users realistically. In each case, participants’ main tasks were to comment on a
speciﬁc blog post or forum thread, tasks requiring them to log in. In the week
following the initial session, participants received email asking them to complete
further tasks from any web-enabled computer.

Table 1. Summary of MVP user studies. The number of sessions includes the total
number of in-lab sessions and at-home tasks.

Number of Number Accounts Pswd

Pswd Study
Sessions of Users Per User Space Selection Type
243 Chosen Hybrid
228 Assigned Hybrid
228 Assigned Hybrid
258 Chosen Hybrid
221 Chosen Hybrid
221 Assigned Hybrid
236 Chosen Hybrid
236 Assigned Hybrid
236 Assigned Hybrid
221 Assigned MTurk
228 Assigned MTurk
228 Chosen MTurk

24
60
20
26
33
81
21
36
20
77
92
30

4
5
5
4
4
5
4
4
4
4
4
4

Study Name

1. PCCP
2. Recognition - image type
3. Recognition - in-depth
4. DAS
5. PassTiles - user-choice
6. PassTiles - memory type
7. Text
8. Text - memory type
9. Text - interference
10. PassTiles - MTurk
11. PassTiles - MTurk 2
12. PCCP - MTurk Training

3
3
4
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

1. PCCP: Persuasive Cued Click-Points (PCCP) [11] is a cued-recall click-
based graphical password system where passwords consist of one user-selected
click-point per image on a sequence of images. The study’s results support and
conﬁrm earlier lab-based studies of the usability and security of PCCP.

2. Recognition - image type, 3. Recognition - in-depth: Face [6, 12] is a
recognition-based scheme where users must identify their assigned images of faces
from among decoys. It was suggested that the human proﬁciency for recognizing
faces would help with remembering such passwords [6]. We implemented Face
and two variations where the type of image was modiﬁed to either everyday
objects or houses [13]. A second study conducted an in-depth comparison of face
and object images. In our conﬁguration, 6 panels of 26 images were shown in
sequence, each panel containing one of the user’s 6 images. Results showed that
objects were as easy or easier to remember than faces while houses was most
diﬃcult. No evidence was found to support higher performance for face images.
4. DAS: Draw-A-Secret (DAS) [14] is a recall-based scheme where users
sketch on a grid using a mouse. Our system used a 5 × 5 grid. Results showed
that users often misunderstood the scheme (e.g., users drew their ﬁgure within
one grid square, not realizing that this was equivalent to one dot in a square).
Users also tended to draw simple ﬁgures that would be easily guessed, and often
re-used passwords across diﬀerent accounts.

5. PassTiles - background type, 6. PassTiles - memory type: PassTiles

passwords consist of a set of squares (tiles) on a grid [15]. The scheme was imple-
mented with a blank background or an image behind the grid, or with individual
objects in each tile. The systems used an 8 × 6 grid and a password consisted
of 5 tiles. The ﬁrst study allowed users to choose their own passwords while
the second provided assigned passwords. Results showed that oﬀering users the
opportunity to combine memory retrieval methods (e.g., having an image or
objects as a cue) may increase memorability of graphical passwords.

7. Text: Text passwords with a minimum length of 6, including at least one
digit and one letter, were also tested. Results showed that although users could
quickly log in (≈ 6 seconds), the majority re-used passwords across accounts.

8. Text - memory type, 9. Text - interference: These studies [17]
tested diﬀerent types of text passwords: 6 randomly assigned characters, 4 ran-
domly assigned common words, and a recognition-based system where the “im-
ages” were words (“Word Recognition”, Figure 3). Results showed only minor
diﬀerences in memorability, but slower login times for the recognition scheme.

3.2 Mechanical Turk studies

MVP also enables fully online user studies with no in-person component. We
have completed two MTurk studies and a third study is in progress.

10. PassTiles - MTurk: Study 6 of PassTiles was replicated using partic-
ipants from MTurk. Instructions were provided entirely through webpages and
email. Results supported those found using the hybrid study.
11. PassTiles - MTurk 2: A second MTurk study of PassTiles used an
8× 10 grid and 6 tiles. Results were similar to the earlier studies, indicating that
the larger theoretical password space did not negatively aﬀect usability.

12: PCCP - MTurk Training: We are currently investigating diﬀerent
delivery methods for training in online studies. Three instruction sets have been
compiled for the PCCP authentication system: a static text/image webpage, an
interactive demo webpage, and a video tutorial.

4 Discussion and Lessons Learned

Based on web server log information about their browsers, participants used
MVP on a variety of computers and platforms without problem. The partici-
pation rate was high during the at-home tasks. Several participants mentioned
enjoying the websites and inquired whether they would be available beyond the
study, providing evidence that participants engaged with the web content as
their primary task. When users forgot their passwords, they reset them from
home without intervention from an administrator.

In this section, we outline a number of lessons learned while running studies
using MVP. This list is not comprehensive, but we hope that these ﬁndings may
assist other experimenters in designing and conducting similar studies.

Force logoﬀs: One problem with using real websites for experimental pur-
poses is that they may not be conﬁgured appropriately for password studies.
The Wordpress blogs were pre-conﬁgured to allow users to remain logged in. We
enforced server-side logoﬀs, so that users would need to log in with each visit.

Ethics: In running user studies of any kind (whether lab, hybrid or online),
not only it is important to obtain permission from the appropriate research
ethics board, but also to give consideration to key issues such as privacy. In our
online studies, email address and crowdsourcing identiﬁer were the only identi-
fying information collected about each participant, and this was never displayed
publicly. Consent forms were completed online and included only the partici-
pant’s email address as a “signature”. All data collected in the study (including
questionnaire data) was collected and stored on our servers, allowing us to have
complete control of the data and ensuring that it is accessed only by authorized
researchers. We are considering an email aliasing system to further anonymize
data while still helpind to detect users trying to participate more than once.

Practicing: In an early MVP study, we noticed a few participants with
several logins immediately preceding a required study task. It appeared that
before returning to the lab, participants were practicing entering their passwords!
When running studies, and considering ecological validity, it is important to
consider that participants may be putting in a diﬀerent eﬀort (whether greater
or less) than they would in a real life scenario.

Avoiding the task at hand: We have occasionally noticed that participants
will develop coping strategies that avoid performing the correct task. In one
study of text passwords, we noticed that instead of remembering their passwords,
participants were resetting their passwords at every login because it was quicker
and easier. In another study (of PassTiles), participants seemed to be coping
with the study tasks by writing all of their passwords down. It is important to
consider how participants may be circumventing your tasks, and either prevent
them from doing so, or collect suﬃcient information to be aware of these coping
strategies. Such behaviours may in fact reﬂect real-life behaviour and may oﬀer
important insight into the real usage of authentication systems.

Global researchers, global audience: To our initial surprise, we could
not post tasks on MTurk as non-US citizens. We instead use Crowdﬂower [2] as
a intermediary that can post tasks to several crowdsourcing systems, including

MTurk. We also had minor issues with international participants who were run-
ning older computer systems and had slow or unreliable internet connections.
Having a robust system that is compatible with a wide variety of environments
is critical. The system should also be able to withstand signiﬁcant web traﬃc
when running MTurk studies and be robust enough to withstand users trying to
cheat and circumvent the system in a variety of ways.

5 Conclusions

MVP is a web-based authentication framework which we used for conducting
more ecologically valid user studies of authentication schemes. It uses instances
of real web-based applications that have been modiﬁed to require login using
conﬁgurable, interchangeable authentication schemes. Now that MVP has been
tested with these shorter studies, we are preparing larger, longer-term (several
months) comparison studies of various authentication schemes.

References

1. Amazon Mechanical Turk, https://www.mturk.com
2. Crowdﬂower, http://crowdflower.com/
3. GrIDsure corporate website. http://www.gridsure.com
4. LimeSurvey: The open source survey application, www.limesurvey.org
5. MRBS, http://mrbs.sourceforge.net/
6. Passfaces Corporation. http://www.passfaces.com/
7. Beautement, A., Sasse, A.M.: Gathering realistic authentication performance data

through ﬁeld trials. In: SOUPS USER Workshop (2010)

8. Biddle, R., Chiasson, S., van Oorschot, P.C.: Graphical Passwords: Learning from

the First Twelve Years. ACM Computing Surveys 44(4) (in press)

9. Chiasson, S., Biddle, R., van Oorschot, P.C.: A second look at the usability of

click-based graphical passwords. In: ACM SOUPS (July 2007)

10. Chiasson, S., Forget, A., Biddle, R., van Oorschot, P.C.: Inﬂuencing users towards

better passwords: Persuasive Cued Click-Points. In: BCS-HCI (2008)

11. Chiasson, S., Stobert, E., Forget, A., Biddle, R., van Oorschot, P.C.: Persuasive
Cued Click-Points: Design, implementation, and evaluation of a knowledge-based
authentication mechanism. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Com-
puting (TDSC) (2012 - in press)

12. Davis, D., Monrose, F., Reiter, M.: On user choice in graphical password schemes.

In: USENIX Security Symposium (2004)

13. Hlywa, M., Biddle, R., Patrick, A.: Facing the facts about image type in

recognition-based graphical passwords. In: ACSAC (2011)

14. Jermyn, I., Mayer, A., Monrose, F., Reiter, M., Rubin, A.: The design and analysis

of graphical passwords. In: USENIX Security Symposium (1999)

15. Stobert, E.: Memorability of Assigned Random Graphical Passwords. Master’s

thesis, Department of Psychology, Carleton University (August 2011)

16. Wiedenbeck, S., Waters, J., Birget, J., Brodskiy, A., Memon, N.: Authentication
using graphical passwords: Eﬀects of tolerance and image choice. In: SOUPS (2005)
17. Wright, N.: Do you see your password? Applying recognition to textual passwords.

Master’s thesis, Department of Psychology, Carleton University (August 2011)

