Security Analysis of a Full-Body Scanner

Keaton Mowery, University of California, San Diego; Eric Wustrow, University of Michigan; 
Tom Wypych, Corey Singleton, Chris Comfort, and Eric Rescorla, University of California, 

San Diego; Stephen Checkoway, Johns Hopkins University; J. Alex Halderman,  

University of Michigan; Hovav Shacham, University of California, San Diego

https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity14/technical-sessions/presentation/mowery

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security Symposium.August 20–22, 2014 • San Diego, CAISBN 978-1-931971-15-7Open access to the Proceedings of  the 23rd USENIX Security Symposium is sponsored by USENIXSecurity Analysis of a Full-Body Scanner

Keaton Mowery*, Eric Wustrow†, Tom Wypych*, Corey Singleton*, Chris Comfort*,

* UC San Diego, † University of Michigan, ‡ Johns Hopkins University

Eric Rescorla*, Stephen Checkoway‡,

J. Alex Halderman†, Hovav Shacham*

Abstract
Advanced imaging technologies are a new class of peo-
ple screening systems used at airports and other sensitive
environments to detect metallic as well as nonmetallic
contraband. We present the ﬁrst independent security
evaluation of such a system, the Rapiscan Secure 1000
full-body scanner, which was widely deployed at airport
checkpoints in the U.S. from 2009 until 2013. We ﬁnd
that the system provides weak protection against adaptive
adversaries: It is possible to conceal knives, guns, and
explosives from detection by exploiting properties of the
device’s backscatter X-ray technology. We also investi-
gate cyberphysical threats and propose novel attacks that
use malicious software and hardware to compromise the
the effectiveness, safety, and privacy of the device. Over-
all, our ﬁndings paint a mixed picture of the Secure 1000
that carries lessons for the design, evaluation, and opera-
tion of advanced imaging technologies, for the ongoing
public debate concerning their use, and for cyberphysical
security more broadly.
1
Introduction
In response to evolving terrorist threats, including non-
metallic explosive devices and weapons, the U.S. Trans-
portation Security Administration (TSA) has adopted ad-
vanced imaging technology (AIT), also known as whole-
body imaging, as the primary passenger screening method
at nearly 160 airports nationwide [50]. Introduced in 2009
and gradually deployed at a cost exceeding $1 billion, AIT
provides, according to the TSA, “the best opportunity to
detect metallic and non-metallic anomalies concealed un-
der clothing without the need to touch the passenger” [48].
AIT plays a critical role in transportation security, and
decisions about its use are a matter of public interest.
The technology has generated considerable controversy,
including claims that the devices are unsafe [40], vio-
late privacy and civil liberties [27, 41], and are ineffec-
tive [8, 21]. Furthermore, AIT devices are complex cyber-
physical systems — much like cars [23] and implantable
medical devices [13] — that raise novel computer security
issues. Despite such concerns, neither the manufacturers
nor the government agencies that deploy these machines
have disclosed sufﬁcient technical details to facilitate rig-
orous independent evaluation [40], on the grounds that
such information could beneﬁt attackers [48]. This lack

Figure 1: The Rapiscan Secure 1000 full-body scanner uses
backscattered X-rays to construct an image through clothing.
Naïvely hidden contraband, such as the handgun tucked into
this subject’s waistband, is readily visible to the device operator.

of transparency has limited the ability of policymakers,
experts, and the public to assess contradicting claims.

To help advance the public debate, we present the ﬁrst
experimental analysis of an AIT conducted independently
of the manufacturer and its customers. We obtained a
Rapiscan Secure 1000 full-body scanner — one of two
AITs widely deployed by the TSA [32] — and performed
a detailed security evaluation of its hardware and software.
Our analysis provides both retrospective insights into the
adequacy of the testing and evaluation procedures that
led up to TSA use of the system, and prospective lessons
about broader security concerns, including cyberphysical
threats, that apply to both current and future AITs.

The Secure 1000 provides a unique opportunity to in-
vestigate the security implications of AITs in a manner
that allows robust yet responsible public disclosure. Al-
though it was used by the TSA from 2009 until 2013,
it has recently been removed from U.S. airports due to
changing functional requirements [34]. Moreover, while
the Secure 1000 uses backscatter X-ray imaging, current
TSA systems are based on a different technology, mil-

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  369

1

limeter waves [11], so many of the attacks we present
are not directly applicable to current TSA checkpoints,
thus reducing the risk that our technical disclosures will
inadvertently facilitate mass terrorism. However, while
Secure 1000 units are no longer used in airports, they still
are in use at other government facilities, such as court-
houses and prisons (see, e.g., [15, 29]). In addition, other
backscatter X-ray devices manufactured by American Sci-
ence and Engineering are currently under consideration
for use at airports [34]. To mitigate any residual risk, we
have redacted a small number of sensitive details from
our attacks in order to avoid providing recipes that would
allow an attacker to reliably defeat the screening process
without having access to a machine for testing.

In the ﬁrst part of our study (Section 3), we test the
Secure 1000’s effectiveness as a physical security system
by experimenting with different methods of concealing
contraband. While the device performs well against naïve
adversaries, fundamental limitations of backscatter imag-
ing allow more clever attackers to defeat it. We show
that an adaptive adversary, with the ability to reﬁne his
techniques based on experiment, can conﬁdently smuggle
contraband past the scanner by carefully arranging it on
his body, obscuring it with other materials, or properly
shaping it. Using these techniques, we are able to hide
ﬁrearms, knives, plastic explosive simulants, and detona-
tors in our tests. These attacks are surprisingly robust, and
they suggest a failure on the part of the Secure 1000’s de-
signers and the TSA to adequately anticipate adaptive at-
tackers. Fortunately, there are simple procedural changes
that can reduce (though not eliminate) these threats, such
as performing supplemental scans from the sides or addi-
tional screening with a magnetometer.

Next, we evaluate the security of the Secure 1000 as
a cyberphysical system (Section 4) and experiment with
three novel kinds of attacks against AITs that target their
effectiveness, safety features, and privacy protections. We
demonstrate how malware infecting the operator’s con-
sole could selectively render contraband invisible upon
receiving a “secret knock” from the attacker. We also at-
tempt (with limited success) to use software-based attacks
to bypass the scanner’s safety interlocks and deliver an
elevated radiation dose. Lastly, we show how an external
device carried by the attacker with no access to the con-
sole can exploit a physical side-channel to capture naked
images of the subject being scanned. These attacks are, in
general, less practical than the techniques we demonstrate
for hiding contraband, and their limitations highlight a
series of conservative engineering choices by the system
designers that should serve as positive examples for future
AITs.

Finally, we attempt to draw broader lessons from these
ﬁndings (Section 5). Our results suggest that while the
Secure 1000 is effective against naïve attackers, it is not

able to guarantee either efﬁcacy or privacy when subject
to attack by an attacker who is knowledgeable about its
inner workings. While some of the detailed issues we
describe are speciﬁc to the scanner model we tested, the
root cause seems to be the failure of the system design-
ers and deployers to think adversarially. This pattern is
familiar to security researchers: past studies of voting
machines [4], cars [23] and medical devices [13] have
all revealed cyberphysical systems that functioned well
under normal circumstances but were not secure in the
face of attack. Thus, we believe this study reinforces
the message that security systems must be subject to ad-
versarial testing before they can be deemed adequate for
widespread deployment.
Research safety and ethics. Since the Secure 1000
emits ionizing radiation, it poses a potential danger to
the health of scan subjects, researchers, and passers by.
Our institutional review board determined that our study
did not require IRB approval; however, we worked closely
with research affairs and radiation safety staff at the uni-
versity that hosted our device to minimize any dangers
and assure regulatory compliance. To protect passers by,
our device was sited in a locked lab, far from the hallway,
and facing a thick concrete wall. To protect researchers,
we marked a 2 m region around the machine with tape;
no one except the scan subject was allowed inside this
region while high voltage was applied to the X-ray tube.
We obtained a RANDO torso phantom [33], made from a
material radiologically equivalent to soft tissue cast over
a human skeleton, and used it in place of a human subject
for all but the ﬁnal conﬁrmatory scans. For these ﬁnal
scans we decided, through consultation with our IRB,
that only a PI would be used as a scan subject. Experi-
ments involving weapons were conducted with university
approval and in coordination with the campus police de-
partment and all ﬁrearms were unloaded and disabled.
We disclosed our security-relevant ﬁndings and suggested
procedural mitigations to Rapiscan and the Department
of Homeland Security ahead of publication.
Online material. Additional resources and the most
recent version of this report are available online at
https://radsec.org/.
2 The Rapiscan Secure 1000
The Secure 1000 was initially developed in the early
1990s by inventor Steven W. Smith [42, 44]. In 1997,
Rapiscan Systems acquired the technology [43] and be-
gan to produce the Rapiscan Secure 1000. In 2007, the
TSA signed a contract with Rapiscan to procure a cus-
tomized version of the Secure 1000 for deployment in
airport passenger screening [47].

We purchased a Rapiscan Secure 1000 from an eBay
seller who had acquired it in 2012 at a surplus auction

370  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

2

from a U.S. Government facility located in Europe [17].
The system was in unused condition. It came with operat-
ing and maintenance manuals as well as detailed schemat-
ics, which were a signiﬁcant aid to reverse engineering.
The system consists of two separate components: the
scanner unit, a large enclosure that handles X-ray genera-
tion and detection under the control of a special purpose
embedded system, and the user console, a freestanding
cabinet that contains a PC with a keyboard and screen.
The two components are connected by a 12 m cable.

The system we tested is a dual pose model, which
means that the subject must turn around in order to be
scanned from the front and back in two passes. TSA
screening checkpoints used the Secure 1000 single pose
model [32], which avoids this inconvenience by scanning
from the front and back using a pair of scanner units.
Our system was manufactured in about September 2006
and includes EPROM software version 2.1. Documents
obtained under the Freedom of Information Act suggest
that more recent versions of the hardware and software
were used for airport screening [45, 52], and we highlight
some of the known differences below. Consequently,
we focus our analysis on fundamental weaknesses in the
Secure 1000 design that we suspect also affect newer
versions. A detailed analysis of TSA models might reveal
additional vulnerabilities.
2.1 Backscatter Imaging
X-ray backscatter imaging exploits the unique properties
of ionizing radiation to penetrate visual concealment and
detect hidden contraband. The physical process which
generates backscatter is Compton scattering, in which a
photon interacts with a loosely bound or free electron and
scatters in an unpredictable direction [7]. Other interac-
tions, such as the photoelectric effect, are possible, and
the fraction of photons that interact and which particular
effect occurs depends on each photon’s energy and the
atomic composition of the mass. For a single-element
material, the determining factor is its atomic number Z,
while a compound material can be modeled by producing
an “effective Z,” or Zeff [46].

Under constant-spectrum X-ray illumination,

the
backscattered intensity of a given point is largely de-
termined by the atomic composition of matter at that
location, and to a lesser extent its density. Thus, organic
materials, like ﬂesh, can be easily differentiated from
materials such as steel or aluminum that are made from
heavier elements.

The Secure 1000 harnesses these effects for contraband
screening by operating as a “reverse camera,” as illus-
trated in Figure 2. X-ray output from a centrally-located
tube (operating at 50 kVp and 5 mA) passes through slits
in shielding material: a ﬁxed horizontal slit directly in
front of a “chopper wheel,” a rapidly spinning disk with

Figure 2: Backscatter Imaging — An X-ray tube (A) mounted
on a platform travels vertically within the scanner. The X-rays
pass through a spinning disk (B) that shapes them into a horizon-
tally scanning beam. Some photons that strike the target (C) are
backscattered toward detectors (D) that measure the reﬂected
energy over time. Adapted from U.S. Patent 8,199,996 [16].

four radial slits. This results in a narrow, collimated X-
ray beam, repeatedly sweeping across the imaging ﬁeld.
During a scan, which takes about 5.7 s, the entire X-ray
assembly moves vertically within the cabinet, such that
the beam passes over every point of the scene in a series
of scan lines.

As the beam sweeps across the scene, a set of 8 large X-
ray detectors measures the intensity of the backscattered
radiation at each point, by means of internal photomulti-
plier tubes (PMTs). The Secure 1000 combines the output
of all 8 detectors, and sends the resulting image signal
to the user console, which converts the time-varying sig-
nal into a 160× 480 pixel monochrome image, with the
intensity of each pixel determined by the Zeff value of
the surface of the scan subject represented by that pixel
location.
2.2 Subsystems
Operator interface. The operator interacts with the Se-
cure 1000 through the user console, a commodity x86 PC
housed within a lockable metal cabinet. With our system,
the user console is connected to the scanner unit via a
serial link and an analog data cable. Documents released
by the TSA indicate that airport checkpoint models were
conﬁgured differently, with an embedded PC inside the
scanner unit linked to a remote operator workstation via a
dedicated Ethernet network [45, 52].

On our unit, the operator software is an MS-DOS ap-
plication called SECURE65.EXE that launches automat-
ically when the console boots.
(TSA models are ap-
parently Windows-based and use different operator soft-
ware [45, 47].) This software is written in a BASIC vari-

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  371

3

ﬁrst and most obvious question to ask is how effectively
the Secure 1000 detects contraband.

To make the discussion concrete, we consider the ma-
chine as it was typically used by the TSA for airport
passenger screening. Under TSA procedures, subjects
were imaged from the front and back, but not from the
sides. A trained operator inspected the images and, if an
anomaly was detected, the passenger was given a manual
pat down to determine whether it was a threat [45]. The
Secure 1000 was used in place of a walk-through metal
detector, rather than both screening methods being em-
ployed sequentially [48]. We focus our analysis on threats
relevant to an airport security context, such as weapons
and explosives, as opposed to other contraband such as
illicit drugs or bulk currency.

To replicate a realistic screening environment, we situ-
ated our Secure 1000 in an open area, oriented 2.5 m from
a concrete wall sufﬁcient to backstop X-ray radiation.
This distance accords with the manufacturer’s recommen-
dation of at least 2 m of open area “for producing the
best possible images” [35]. For typical tests, we arranged
the subject at a distance of about 38 cm in front of the
scanner using the foot position template provided with
the machine.
Naïve adversary. First, we consider the scanner’s ef-
fectiveness against a naïve adversary, an attacker whose
tactics do not change in response to the introduction of
the device. Although this is a weak attacker, it seems
to correspond to the threat model under which the scan-
ner was ﬁrst tested by the government, in a 1991 study
of a prototype of the Secure 1000 conducted by Sandia
National Laboratories [22]. Our results under this threat
model generally comport with theirs. Guns, knives, and
blocks of explosives naïvely carried on the front or back
of the subject’s body are visible to the scanner operator.
Three effects contribute to the detectability of contra-
band. The ﬁrst is contrast: human skin appears white
as it backscatters most incident X-ray radiation, while
metals, ceramics, and bone absorb X-rays and so appear
dark gray or black. The second is shadows cast by three-
dimensional objects as they block the X-ray beam, which
accentuate their edges. The third is distortion of the sub-
ject’s ﬂesh as a result of the weight of the contraband or
the mechanics of its attachment. The naïve adversary is
unlikely to avoid all three effects by chance.

A successful detection of hidden contraband can be
seen in Figure 1. The subject has concealed a .380 ACP
pistol within his waistband. The X-ray beam interacts
with the gun metal signiﬁcantly differently than the sur-
rounding ﬂesh, and the sharp contrast in backscatter in-
tensity is immediately noticeable.
Adaptive adversary. Of course, real attackers are not
entirely ignorant of the scanner. The TSA announced

Figure 3: Operator View — The user console displays front
and back images and offers basic enhancements and 2 × zoom.
It also allows the operator to print images or save them to disk.

ant, and the main user interface is a 640× 480 pixel, 4-bit
grayscale screen, as shown in Figure 3. The operator
invokes a scan by pressing a hand switch. After image ac-
quisition, the operator can inspect the scan by means of a
2× zoom and interactive brightness and contrast controls.
The image can also be saved to disk or printed. Further,
the software contains several calibration functions that
can only be accessed by entering a 4 digit numeric pass-
word. The password is hard-coded and is printed in the
maintenance manual.
Scanner unit. The scanner unit contains an assortment
of electrical and mechanical systems under the control of
an embedded computer called the System Control Board
(SCB). The SCB houses an Intel N80C196KB12 micro-
controller, executing software contained on a 32 KiB sock-
eted ROM. It interacts with the user console PC over a
bidirectional RS-232 serial link using simple ASCII com-
mands such as SU for “scan up” and SD for “scan down.”
In turn, the SCB uses digital and analog interfaces to
direct and monitor other components, including the X-
ray tube, PMTs, and chopper wheel. It also implements
hardware-based safety interlocks on the production of
X-rays, which we discuss further in Section 4.2.

To control vertical movement of the X-ray tube, the
scanner unit uses an off-the-shelf reprogrammable servo
motor controller, the Parker Gemini GV6. In normal op-
eration, the servo controller allows the SCB to trigger a
movement of the X-ray tube, initially to a “home” posi-
tion and subsequently to scan up and down at predeﬁned
rates. There is no command to move the tube to a speciﬁc
intermediate position.
3 Contraband Detection
As the Secure 1000 is intended to detect prohibited or
dangerous items concealed on the body of an attacker, the

372  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

4

(a) Subject with .380 ACP pistol taped above knee.

(b) Subject with .380 ACP pistol sewn to pant leg.

Figure 4: Concealing a Pistol by Positioning — The Secure 1000 cannot distinguish between high Zeff materials, such as a metal
handgun, and the absence of a backscatter response. Carefully placed metallic objects can be invisible against the dark background.

that it would be used at screening checkpoints [12, 48],
the backscatter imaging mechanism is documented in
patents and manufacturer reports [16, 24, 36], images cap-
tured with the device have appeared in the media [12, 25],
and the physics of backscatter X-rays are well under-
stood [2, 7, 22]. We must assume that attackers have such
information and adapt their tactics in response.

To simulate an adaptive adversary, we performed ex-
periments in the style of white-box penetration testing
commonly employed in the computer security ﬁeld. We
allowed ourselves complete knowledge of how the scan-
ner operates as well as the ability to perform test scans,
observed the resulting images, and used them to adjust
our concealment methods.

Such interactive testing is not strictly necessary to de-
velop clever attacks. Indeed, researchers with no access to
the Secure 1000 have proposed a number of concealment
strategies based only on published information [21], and
we experimentally conﬁrm that several of these attacks are
viable. However, the ability to perform tests substantially

increases the probability that an attack will succeed on
the ﬁrst attempt against a real deployment. A determined
adversary might acquire this level of access in several
ways: by buying a machine, as we did; by colluding with
a dishonest operator; or by probing the security of real
installations over time.

In the remainder of this section, we describe experi-
ments with three adaptive concealment techniques and
show that they can be used to defeat the Secure 1000. We
successfully use them to smuggle ﬁrearms, knives, and
explosive simulants past the scanner.
3.1 Concealment by Positioning
The ﬁrst concealment technique makes use of a crucial
observation about X-ray physics: backscatter screening
machines emitting X-rays in the 50 keV range, such as the
Secure 1000, cannot differentiate between the absence of
matter and the existence of materials with high Zeff (e.g.,
iron and lead). That is, when the scanner emits probing
X-rays in a direction and receives no backscatter, it can

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  373

5

either be because the beam interacted with nothing, i.e.,
traveled unimpeded past the screening subject, or because
the beam shone directly upon a material which absorbed
it entirely and thus did not backscatter. In either case, the
resulting pixels will be dark.

These facts lead directly to a straightforward conceal-
ment attack for high Zeff contraband: position the ob-
ject such that it avoids occluding the carrier’s body with
respect to the X-ray beam. This technique was ﬁrst
suggested on theoretical grounds by Kaufman and Carl-
son [21]. In limited trials, a TSA critic used it to smuggle
small metal objects through airport checkpoints equipped
with the Secure 1000 and other AITs [8]. Note that this at-
tack is not enabled by a poor choice of image background
color; as discussed above, the scanner cannot differentiate
between the metal objects and the absence of material.

To more fully investigate this attack, we obtained a set
of weapons: both knives and ﬁrearms, ranging from a
.380 ACP pistol to an AR-15 semi-automatic riﬂe. When
we scanned the weapons against a dark backdrop, most
of the ﬁrearms were readily visible due to the presence
of nonmetallic parts. After testing a number of ﬁrearms,
we settled on our .380 ACP pistol as the most suitable
candidate for concealment.

We performed several trials to test different placement
and attachment strategies. In the end, we achieved excel-
lent results with two approaches: carefully afﬁxing the
pistol to the outside of the leg just above the knee using
tape, and sewing it inside the pant leg near the same loca-
tion. Front and back scans for both methods are shown in
Figure 4. In each case, the pistol is invisible against the
dark background, and the attachment method leaves no
other indication of the weapon’s presence.

In a similar test, we concealed an 11 cm metal folding
knife, in its closed position, along our test subject’s side.
In this case, too, front and back scans were completely
unable to detect the weapon.

Fortunately, simple procedural changes can thwart
these attacks. Instead of performing only front and back
scans, every subject could also be made to undergo scans
from the left and right sides. Under these scans, a high
Zeff weapon positioned on the side of the body would
be as obvious as the one in Figure 1. Unfortunately,
these additional scans would nearly halve the maximum
throughput of the checkpoint, as well as double each per-
son’s radiation dose. Another possible mitigation would
be to screen each subject with a magnetometer, which
would unequivocally ﬁnd metallic contraband but would
fail to uncover more exotic weapons, such as ceramic
knives [50, 54]. We note that the attacker’s gait or ap-
pearance might be compromised by the mass and bulk
of the ﬁrearm or knife, and this might be noticeable to
security personnel outside of the backscatter X-ray screen-
ing.

3.2 Concealment by Masking
The second object concealment techniques we attempted
are similarly based on X-ray physics: the brightness of a
material in the image is directly correlated to its backscat-
ter intensity, which in turn is determined by the Zeff and
density of the matter in the path of the beam. Therefore,
any combination of substances which scatter incoming
X-rays at the same approximate intensity as human ﬂesh
will be indistinguishable from the rest of the human.

One consequence of this fact is that high-Zeff contra-
band can be concealed by masking it with an appropriate
thickness of low-Zeff material. We experimented with
several masking materials to ﬁnd one with a Zeff value
close to that of ﬂesh. We obtained good results with the
common plastic PTFE (Teﬂon), although due to its low
density a signiﬁcant thickness is required to completely
mask a metallic object.

To work around this issue, we took advantage of the Se-
cure 1000’s ability to see bones close to the skin. Figure 5
demonstrates this approach: an 18 cm knife is afﬁxed to
the spine and covered with 1.5 cm of PTFE. As the X-rays
penetrate through the material, they backscatter so that the
knife outline approximates our subject’s spine. While this
mask arrangement creates hard edges and shadows which
render it noticeable to screening personnel these effects
could be reduced by tapering the edges of the mask.

A more difﬁcult challenge for the attacker is taking
into account the anatomy of the speciﬁc person being
imaged. Shallow bones and other dense tissue are visible
to the scanner under normal conditions, and a poorly
conﬁgured mask will stand out against these darker areas
of the scan. We conclude that masking can be an effective
concealment technique, but achieving high conﬁdence of
success would require access to a scanner for testing.
3.3 Concealment by Shaping
Our third and ﬁnal concealment technique applies a strat-
egy ﬁrst theorized in [21] to hide malleable, low-Zeff con-
traband, such as plastic explosives. These materials pro-
duce low contrast against human ﬂesh, and, unlike rigid
weapons, the attacker can reshape them so that they match
the contours of the body.

To experiment with this technique, we acquired radi-
ological simulants for both Composition C-4 [56] and
Semtex [57], two common plastic high explosives. These
simulants are designed to emulate the plastic explosives
with respect to X-ray interactions, and both are composed
of moldable putty, similar to the actual explosive materi-
als. We imaged both C-4 and Semtex simulants with the
Secure 1000, and found that they appear very similar. We
selected the C-4 simulant for subsequent tests.

Our initial plan was to modify the simulants’ Zeff to
better match that of ﬂesh, by thoroughly mixing in ﬁne
metallic powder. To our surprise, however, a thin pancake

374  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

6

(a) No contraband

(b) 18 cm knife taped to spine

(c) Knife behind 1.5 cm plastic block

Figure 5: Concealing a Knife by Masking — We ﬁnd that high-Zeff materials can be hidden by covering them with lower Zeff
materials, such as the common plastic PTFE (Teﬂon). For example, a metal knife is clearly visible when naïvely concealed, but when
covered with a thin plastic block it approximates the color of the spine. Tapering the block’s edges would reduce the visible outline.

(about 1 cm) of unmodiﬁed C-4 simulant almost perfectly
approximated the backscatter intensity of our subject’s
abdomen.

We afﬁxed the pancake with tape (which is invisible to
the Secure 1000), and faced two further problems. First,
the pancake covered our subject’s navel, which is nor-
mally clearly visible as a small black area in the scans.
Second, by design, plastic explosives are almost com-
pletely inert without a matching detonator. These prob-
lems neatly solve each other: we attached a detonator,
consisting of a small explosive charge in a metal shell,
directly over our subject’s navel. Since the detonator is
coated in metal, it absorbs X-rays quite well and mimics
the look of the navel in the ﬁnal image.

Figure 6 shows a side-by-side comparison of our test
subject both carrying no contraband and carrying 200 g of
C-4 explosive and attached detonator. To put this amount
in perspective, “Shoe Bomber” Richard Reid reportedly
carried about 280 g of explosive material [6], and the
bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 is thought to
have contained 350 g of Semtex [55].

These scans indicate that plastic explosives can be
smuggled through a Secure 1000 screening, since thin
pancakes of these materials do not contrast strongly with
ﬂesh. While a metal detector would have been sufﬁcient
to detect the detonator we used, not all detonators have
signiﬁcant metal components.

In summary, an adaptive adversary can use several attack
techniques to carry knives, guns, and plastic explosives
past the Secure 1000. However, we also ﬁnd that multiple
iterations of experimentation and adjustment are likely

necessary to achieve consistent success. The security of
the Secure 1000, then, rests strongly on the adversary’s
inability to acquire access to the device for testing. How-
ever, since we were able to purchase a Secure 1000, it
is reasonable to assume that determined attackers and
well-ﬁnanced terrorist groups can do so as well. We
emphasize that procedural changes — speciﬁcally, per-
forming side scans and supplementing the scanner with
a magnetometer — would defeat some, though not all, of
the demonstrated attacks.
4 Cyberphysical Attacks
The Secure 1000, like other AITs, is a complex cyber-
physical system. It ties together X-ray emitters, detectors,
and analog circuitry under the control of embedded com-
puter systems, and feeds the resulting image data to a
traditional desktop system in the user console. In this
section, we investigate computer security threats against
AITs. We demonstrate a series of novel software- and
hardware-based attacks that undermine the Secure 1000’s
efﬁcacy, safety features, and privacy protections.
4.1 User Console Malware
The ﬁrst threat we consider is malware infecting the user
console. On our version of the Secure 1000, the user con-
sole is an MS-DOS–based PC attached to the scanner unit
via a proprietary cable; TSA models apparently used Win-
dows and a dedicated Ethernet switch [47, 49]. Although
neither conﬁguration is connected to an external network,
there are several possible infection vectors. If the opera-
tors or maintenance personnel are malicious, they could
abuse their access in order to manually install malware.

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  375

7

smartphone — although operators are forbidden to have
such devices in the screening room [39].

Second, INSECURE.EXE selectively subverts the scan-
ner’s ability to detect contraband. Before displaying each
scan, it applies a pattern recognition algorithm to look for
a “secret knock” from the attacker: the concentric squares
of a QR code position block. If this pattern occurs, INSE-
CURE.EXE replaces the real scan with a preprogrammed
innocuous image. The actual scan, containing the trigger
pattern and any other concealed contraband, is entirely
hidden.

To trigger this malicious substitution, the subject sim-
ply wears the appropriate pattern, made out of any mate-
rial with a sufﬁciently different Zeff than human tissue. In
our experiments, we arranged lead tape in the target shape,
attached to an undershirt, as shown in Figure 7. When
worn under other clothing, the target is easily detected by
the malware but hidden from visual inspection.

Recently, in response to privacy concerns, the TSA has
replaced manual review of images with algorithmic image
analysis software known as automated target recognition
(ATR) [51]. Instead of displaying an image of the subject,
this software displays a stylized ﬁgure, with graphical
indicators showing any regions which the software con-
siders suspect and needing manual resolution. (Delays
in implementing this algorithm led the TSA to remove
Secure 1000 machines from airports entirely [1].) If mal-
ware can compromise the ATR software or its output
path, it can simply suppress these indicators — no image
replacement needed.
4.2 Embedded Controller Attacks
The System Control Board (SCB) managing the physi-
cal scanner is a second possible point of attack. While
the SCB lacks direct control over scan images, it does
control the scanner’s mechanical systems and X-ray tube.
We investigated whether an attacker who subverts the
SCB ﬁrmware could cause the Secure 1000 to deliver an
elevated radiation dose to the scan subject.

This attack is complicated by the fact that the Se-
cure 1000 includes a variety of safety interlocks that
prevent operation under unexpected conditions. Circuits
sense removal of the front panel, continuous motion of the
chopper wheel and the vertical displacement servo, X-ray
tube temperature and supply voltage, X-ray production
level, key position (“Standby” vs. “On”), and the duration
of the scan, among other parameters. If any anomalous
state is detected, power to the X-ray tube is immediately
disabled, ceasing X-ray emission.

While some of these sensors merely provide inputs to
the SCB software, others are tied to hard-wired watchdog
circuits that cut off X-ray power without software media-
tion. However, the ﬁrmware can bypass these hardware
interlocks. At the beginning of each scan, operational

Figure 6: Concealing Explosives by Shaping — Left: Subject
with no contraband. Right: Subject with more than 200 g of C-4
plastic explosive simulant plus detonator, molded to stomach.

The software on our machine lacks any sort of electronic
access controls (e.g., passwords) or software veriﬁcation.
While the PC is mounted in a lockable cabinet, we were
able to pick the lock in under 10 seconds with a commer-
cially available tool. Therefore, even an outsider with
temporary physical access could easily introduce mali-
cious code. TSA systems may be better locked down, but
sophisticated adversaries have a track record of infecting
even highly secured, airgapped systems [26, 31].

We implemented a form of user console malware by re-
verse engineering SECURE65.EXE, the front-end software
package used by the Secure 1000, and creating a mali-
cious clone. Our version, INSECURE.EXE, is a functional,
pixel-accurate reimplementation of the original program
and required approximately one man-month to create.

In addition to enabling basic scanning operations, IN-
SECURE.EXE has two malicious features. First, every
scan image is saved to a hidden location on disk for
later exﬁltration. This is a straightforward attack, and
it demonstrates one of many ways that software-based
privacy protections can be bypassed. Of course, the user
could also take a picture of the screen using a camera or

376  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

8

(a) Lead tape pattern

(b) Pattern concealed

(c) Scan as captured

Figure 7: A Secret Knock — We demonstrate how malware infecting the Secure 1000 user console could be used to defeat the
scanner. The malware is triggered when it detects a speciﬁc pattern in a scan, as shown here. It then replaces the real image (c) of the
attacker, which might reveal hidden contraband, with an innocuous image stored on disk. Pattern recognition occurs in real time.

characteristics such as tube voltage and servo motion
ﬂuctuate outside their nominal ranges. To prevent imme-
diate termination of every scan, SCB software temporarily
asserts a bypass signal, which disables the hardware inter-
locks. This signal feeds a “bypass watchdog” circuit of
its own, meant to prevent continual interlock bypass, but
the SCB can pet this watchdog by continuously toggling
the bypass signal, and cause all hardware interlocks to
be ignored. Thus, every safety interlock is either directly
under software control or can be bypassed by software.
We developed replacement SCB ﬁrmware capable of
disabling all of the software and hardware safety inter-
locks in the Secure 1000. With the interlocks disabled,
corrupt ﬁrmware can, for instance, move the X-ray tube
to a speciﬁc height, stop the chopper wheel, and activate
X-ray power, causing the machine to deliver the radia-
tion dose from an entire dose to a single point. Only the
horizontal displacement of this point is not directly un-
der ﬁrmware control — it depends on where the chopper
wheel happens to come to rest.

Delivering malicious SCB ﬁrmware presents an addi-
tional challenge. The ﬁrmware is stored on a replaceable
socketed EPROM inside the scanner unit, which is se-
cured by an easily picked wafer tumbler lock. Although
attackers with physical access could swap out the chip,
they could cause greater harm by, say, hiding a bomb
inside the scanner. For SCB attacks to pose a realistic
safety threat, they would need to be remotely deployable.
Due to the scanner’s modular design, the only feasible
vector for remote code execution is the serial link between
the user console and the SCB. We reverse engineered the
SCB ﬁrmware and extensively searched for vulnerabili-

ties. The ﬁrmware is simple (<32 KiB) and appears to
withstand attacks quite well. Input parsing uses a ﬁxed
length buffer, to which bytes are written from only one
function. This function implements bounds checking cor-
rectly. Data in the buffer is always processed in place,
rather than being copied to other locations that might re-
sult in memory corruption. We were unable to cause any
of this code to malfunction in a vulnerable manner.

While we are unable to remotely exploit the SCB to
deliver an elevated radiation dose, the margin of safety
by which this attack fails is not reassuring. Hardware
interlocks that can be bypassed from software represent a
safety mechanism but not a security defense. Ultimately,
the Secure 1000 is protected only by its modular, isolated
design and by the simplicity of its ﬁrmware.
4.3 Privacy Side-Channel Attack
AIT screening raises signiﬁcant privacy concerns because
it creates a naked image of the subject. Scans can re-
veal sensitive information, including anatomical size and
shape of body parts, location and quantity of fat, existence
of medical conditions, and presence of medical devices
such as ostomy pouches, implants, or prosthetics. As
ﬁgures throughout the paper show, the resulting images
are quite revealing.

Recognizing this issue, the TSA and scanner manu-
facturers have taken steps to limit access to raw scanned
images. Rapiscan and DHS claim that the TSA machines
had no capacity to save or store the images [27, 45]. The
TSA also stated that the backscatter machines they used
had a “privacy algorithm applied to blur the image” [50].
We are unable to verify these claims due to software dif-

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  377

9

the privacy threat model for AITs appears to have been
focused almost entirely on concerns about the behavior
of screening personnel, rather than the general public.

In the scenario we envision, an attacker follows a target
subject (for instance, a celebrity or politician) to a screen-
ing checkpoint while carrying an X-ray detector hidden in
a suitcase. As the victim is scanned, the hardware records
the backscattered X-rays for later reconstruction.

We experimented with the Secure 1000 to develop a
proof-of-concept of such an attack. The major technical
challenge is gathering enough radiation to have an accept-
able signal/noise ratio. The Secure 1000 uses eight large
photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) — four on either side of
the X-ray generator — in order to capture as much signal
as possible. For best results, an attacker should likewise
maximize observing PMT surface area, and minimize
distance from the subject, as radiation intensity falls off
quadratically with distance. To avoid arousing suspicion,
an attacker may be limited to only one PMT, and may
also be restricted in placement.

To determine whether external image reconstruction is
feasible, we used a small PMT, a 75 mm Canberra model
BIF2996-2 operated at 900 V, with a 10 cm× 10 cm NaI
crystal scintillator. We placed this detector adjacent to
the scanner and fed the signal to a Canberra Model 1510
ampliﬁer connected to a Tektronix DPO 3014 oscillo-
scope. After capturing the resulting signal, we converted
the time varying intensity to an image and applied manual
enhancements to adjust levels and remove noise.

Figure 8 shows the results from the scanner and from
our corresponding reconstruction. While our proof-of-
concept results are signiﬁcantly less detailed than the
scanner’s output, they suggest that a determined attacker,
equipped with a suitcase-sized PMT, might achieve sat-
isfactory quality. A further concern is that changes in
future backscatter imaging devices might make this attack
even more practical. Since the PMTs in the Secure 1000
are close to the maximum size that can ﬁt in the avail-
able space, further improvements to the scanner’s per-
formance — i.e., better resolution or reduced time per
scan — would likely require increased X-ray output. This
would also increase the amount of information leaked to
an external detector.
5 Discussion and Lessons
The Secure 1000 appears to perform largely as advertised
in the non-adversarial setting. It readily detected a variety
of naïvely concealed contraband materials. Our prelim-
inary measurements of the radiation exposure delivered
during normal scanning (Appendix A) seem consistent
with public statements by the manufacturer, TSA, and
the FDA [5, 18, 38, 54]. Moreover, it seems clear that
the manufacturer took signiﬁcant care to ensure that pre-
dictable equipment malfunctions would not result in un-

(a) From scanner

(b) From external detector

Figure 8: Attacking Privacy — An attacker could use a detec-
tor hidden in a suitcase to capture images of the subject during
scanning. As a proof of concept, we used a small external
PMT to capture images that are consistent with the scanner’s
output. A larger detector would produce more detailed images.

ferences between our machine and TSA models. Our
Secure 1000 has documented save, recall (view saved
images), and print features and does not appear to have a
mechanism to disable them. In fact, using forensic anal-
ysis software on the user console’s drive, we were able
to recover a number of stored images from test scans that
were incompletely deleted during manufacturing.

These software-based defenses aim to safeguard pri-
vacy in images that are constructed by the machine, but
they do not address a second class of privacy attacks
against AITs: an outsider observer could try to recon-
struct scanned images by using their own external detector
hardware. The most mechanically complex, dangerous,
and energy intensive aspects of backscatter imaging are
related to X-ray illumination; sensing the backscattered
radiation is comparatively simple. Since X-rays scatter
off the subject in a broad arc, they create a kind of physi-
cal side channel that potentially leaks a naked image of
the subject to any nearby attacker. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to propose such an attack;

378  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

10

safe radiation doses; in order for this to happen a number
of independent failures would be required, including fail-
ures of safety interlocks speciﬁcally designed to prevent
unsafe conditions.

However, the Secure 1000 performs less well against
clever and adaptive adversaries, who can use a number
of techniques to bypass its detection capabilities and to
attempt to subvert it by cyberphysical means.
In this
section, we use the device’s strengths and weaknesses
to draw lessons that may help improve the security of
other AITs and cyberphysical security systems more gen-
erally.
The effectiveness of the device is constrained by facts
of X-ray physics . . . As discussed in Section 2.1,
Compton scattering is the physical phenomenon which
enables backscatter imaging. As the tight beam of X-rays
shines upon the scene, it interacts with the scene material.
The intensity and energy spectrum of the backscattered
radiation is a function of both the X-ray spectrum emitted
by the imaging device and the atomic composition of the
material in the scene.

The Secure 1000 emits a single constant X-ray spec-
trum, with a maximum energy of 50 keV, and detects the
intensity of backscatter to produce its image. Any two
materials, no matter their actual atomic composition, that
backscatter the same approximate intensity of X-rays will
appear the same under this technology. This physical pro-
cess enables our results in Section 3.3. This issue extends
beyond the Secure 1000: any backscatter imaging device
based upon single-spectrum X-ray emission and detection
will be vulnerable to such attacks.

By contrast, baggage screening devices (such as the re-
cently studied Rapiscan 522B; see [37]) usually use trans-
missive, rather than backscatter, X-ray imaging. These de-
vices also often apply dual-energy X-ray techniques that
combine information from low-energy and high-energy
scans into a single image. To avoid detection by such sys-
tems, contraband will need to resemble benign material
under two spectra, a much harder proposition.
. . . but physics is irrelevant in the presence of soft-
ware compromise.
In the Secure 1000, as in other
cyberphysical screening systems, the image of the ob-
ject scanned is processed by software. If that software
has been tampered with, it can modify the actual scan
in arbitrary ways, faking or concealing threats. Indeed,
the ability of device software to detect threats and bring
them to the attention of the operator is presumed in the
“Automated Target Recognition” software used in current
TSA millimeter-wave scanners [51]. Automatic suppres-
sion of threats by malicious software is simply the (easier
to implement) dual of automatic threat detection. As we
show in Section 4.1, malware can be stealthy, activating
only when it observes a “secret knock.”

Software security, including ﬁrmware updates, net-
worked access, and chain-of-custody for any physical
media, must be considered in any cyberphysical scanning
system. Even so, no publicly known study commissioned
by TSA considers software security.
Procedures are critical, but procedural best practices
are more easily lost than those embedded in software.
As early as 1991, Sandia National Labs recommended the
use of side scans to ﬁnd some contraband:

A metallic object on the side of a person would
blend in with the background and be unob-
served. However, a side scan would provide
an image of the object. There are other means
of addressing this which IRT is considering
presently [22, page 14].

Yet TSA procedures appear to call for only front and back
scans, and the device manual characterizes side scans as
an unusual practice:

The Secure 1000 can conduct scans in four sub-
ject positions, front, rear, left side and right side.
Most users only conduct front and rear scans
in routine operations and reserve the side scans
for special circumstances [35, page 3-7].

Omitting side scans makes it possible to conceal ﬁrearms,
as we discuss in Section 3.1.

Since side scans are necessary for good security, the
device’s design should encourage their use by default. Yet,
if anything, the scanner user interface nudges operators
away from performing side scans. It allows the display
of only two images at a time, making it poorly suited
to taking four scans of a subject. A better design would
either scan from all sides automatically (the Secure 1000
is already sold in a conﬁguration that scans from two sides
without the subject’s turning around) or encourage/require
a four-angle scan.
Adversarial thinking, as usual, is crucial for security.
The Sandia report concludes that both C-4 and Detasheet
plastic explosives are detected by the Secure 1000. At-
tached to their report is an image from one C-4 test
(Figure 9), wherein a 0.95 cm thick C-4 block is no-
ticeable only by edge effects — it is outlined by its own
shadow, while the intensity within the block almost ex-
actly matches the surrounding ﬂesh. This suggests a fail-
ure to think adversarially: since plastic explosives are, by
design, moldable putty, the attacker can simply gradually
thin and taper the edges of the mass, drastically reducing
edge effects and rendering it much less noticeable under
X-ray backscatter imaging. We describe precisely such
an attack in Section 3.3.

The basic problem appears to be that the system, while
well engineered, appears not to have been designed, doc-
umented, or deployed with adaptive attack in mind. For

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  379

11

to narrow data interfaces. The Secure 1000 gets these
principles right in many respects. For example, the PC
software does not have the ability to command the X-ray
tube to a particular height. Instead, it can only command
the tube to return to its start position or to take a scan.

Our main suggestion for improving the Secure 1000’s
cyberphysical security is to remove the ability for the
control board ﬁrmware to override the safety interlocks
(something currently needed only brieﬂy, at scan initial-
ization). As long as this bypass functionality is in place,
the interlocks can serve as safety mechanisms but not as
a defense against software- or ﬁrmware-based attacks.

Published reports about

Keeping details of the machine’s behavior secret
didn’t help . . .
the Se-
cure 1000 have been heavily redacted, omitting even
basic details about the machine’s operation. This did
not stop members of the public from speculating about
ways to circumvent the machine, using only open-source
information. In an incident widely reported in the press,
Jonathan Corbett suggested that ﬁrearms hanging off the
body might be invisible against the dark background [8],
an attack we conﬁrm and reﬁne in Section 3.1. Two
physicists, Leon Kaufman and Joseph Carlson, reverse en-
gineered the Secure 1000’s characteristics from published
scans and concluded that “[i]t is very likely that a large
(15–20 cm in diameter), irregularly-shaped, [one] cm-
thick pancake [of plastic explosive] with beveled edges,
taped to the abdomen, would be invisible to this technol-
ogy” [21], an attack we conﬁrm and reﬁne in Section 3.3.
Keeping basic information about the device secret made
an informed public debate about its use at airports more
difﬁcult, but did not prevent dangerous attacks from being
devised.

. . . but keeping attackers from testing attacks on the
machine might. To a degree that surprised us, our at-
tacks beneﬁted from testing on the device itself. Our ﬁrst
attempts at implementing a new attack strategy were of-
ten visible to the scanner, and reliable concealment was
made possible only by iteration and reﬁnement. It goes
without saying that software-replacement attacks on the
console are practical only if one has a machine to reverse
engineer. As a result, we conclude that, in the case of
the Secure 1000, keeping the machine out of the hands of
would-be attackers may well be an effective strategy for
preventing reliable exploitation, even if the details of the
machine’s operation were disclosed.

The effectiveness of such a strategy depends critically
on the difﬁculty of obtaining access to the machine. In
addition to the device we purchased, at least one other
Secure 1000 was available for sale on eBay for months
after we obtained ours. We do not know whether it sold, or
to whom. Also, front-line security personnel will always
have some level of access to the device at each deployment

Figure 9: Naïve Evaluation — In an evaluation by Sandia Na-
tional Labs, a Secure 1000 prototype successfully detects blocks
of C-4 plastic explosive and Lucite attached to the subject’s
chest. Observe that the detection is based almost entirely on the
X-ray shadow surrounding each rectangular block, which can be
reduced or eliminated by an adaptive adversary through clever
shaping and positioning of contraband. Reproduced from [22].

instance, attaching contraband to the side of the body as
described in Section 3.1 is a straightforward attack that
is enabled by scanning only straight-on rather than from
all angles. However, the operator’s manual shows only
example images where the contraband is clearly at the
front or the back.

The other attacks we describe in Sections 3 and 4,
which allow us to circumvent or weaken the advertised
efﬁcacy, privacy, and security claims, again show that the
system’s designers failed to think adversarially.
Simplicity and modular design are also crucial for se-
curity. The system control board implements simple,
well-deﬁned functionality and communicates with the op-
erator console by means of a simple protocol. We were
unable to compromise the control board by abusing the
communication protocol. This is in contrast to the scanner
console, whose software runs on a general-purpose COTS
operating system.

Simplicity and modular design prevented worse attacks,
but do other AITs reﬂect these design principles? Modern
embedded systems tend towards greater integration, in-
creased software control, and remote network capabilities,
which are anathema to security.

Components should be designed with separation of con-
cerns in mind: each component should be responsible for
controlling one aspect of the machine’s operation. Com-
munication between components should be constrained

380  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

12

installation (including at non-TSA facilities) as they are
responsible for its continued operation. Given these facts,
imposing stricter purchase controls on backscatter X-ray
machines than those currently enacted may not be enough
to keep determined adversaries from accessing, studying,
and experimenting with them.
6 Related work
Cyberphysical devices must be evaluated not only for
their safety but also for their security in the presence of an
adversary [19]. This consideration is especially important
for AITs, which are deployed to security checkpoints. Un-
fortunately, AIT manufacturers and TSA have not, to date,
allowed an unfettered independent assessment of AITs.
Security evaluators retained by a manufacturer or its cus-
tomers may not have an incentive to ﬁnd problems [30].
In the case of a backscatter X-ray AIT speciﬁcally, an
evaluation team may be skilled in physics but lack the ex-
pertise to identify software vulnerabilities, or vice versa.
Ours is the ﬁrst study to consider computer security
aspects of an AIT’s design and operation, and the ﬁrst
truly independent assessment of an AIT’s security, privacy,
and efﬁcacy implications informed by experimentation
with an AIT device.
Efﬁcacy and procedures.
In 1991, soon after its initial
development, the Secure 1000 was evaluated by Sandia
National Laboratories on behalf of IRT Corp., the com-
pany then working to commercialize the device. The
Sandia report [22] assessed the device’s effectiveness in
screening for ﬁrearms, explosives, nuclear materials, and
drugs. The Sandia evaluators do not appear to have con-
sidered adaptive strategies for positioning and shaping
contraband, nor did they consider attacks on the device’s
software. Nevertheless, they observed that side scans
were sometimes necessary to detect ﬁrearms.

More recently, the Department of Homeland Security’s
Ofﬁce of Inspector General released a report reviewing
TSA’s use of the Secure 1000 [10]. This report proposed
improvements in TSA procedures surrounding the ma-
chines but again did not consider adversarial conditions
or software vulnerabilities.

Working only from published descriptions of the de-
vice, researchers have hypothesized that ﬁrearms can be
concealed hanging off the body [8] and that plastic explo-
sives can be caked on the body [21]. We conﬁrm these
attacks are possible in Section 3 and reﬁne them through
access to the device for testing.
Health concerns. The ionizing radiation used by the
Secure 1000 poses at least potential health risks. Stud-
ies performed on behalf of TSA by the Food and Drug
Administration’s Center for Devices and Radiological
Health [5] and by the Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory [18] attempted to quantify the overall

radiation dose delivered by the device. Both studies saw
public release only in heavily redacted form, going so far
as to redact even the effective current of the X-ray tube.
In 2010, Professors at the University of California, San
Francisco wrote an open letter to John P. Holdren, the
Assistant to the President for Science and Technology,
expressing their concern about potential health effects
from the use of backscatter X-ray scanners at airports [40].
The letter writers drew on their radiological expertise, but
did not have access to a Secure 1000 to study. The FDA
published a response disputing the technical claims in the
UCSF letter [28], as did the inventor of the Secure 1000,
Steven W. Smith [43]. Under dispute was not just the
total radiation dose but its distribution through the skin
and body. In independent work concurrent with ours, a
task group of the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine [2] explicitly considered skin dose. The task
group’s measurements are within an order of magnitude
of our own, presented in Appendix A.
7 Conclusion
We obtained a Rapiscan Secure 1000 and evaluated its
effectiveness for people screening. Ours was the ﬁrst
analysis of an AIT that is independent of the device’s
manufacturer and its customers; the ﬁrst to assume an
adaptive adversary; and the ﬁrst to consider software as
well as hardware. By exploiting properties of the Se-
cure 1000’s backscatter X-ray technology, we were able
to conceal knives, ﬁrearms, plastic explosive simulants,
and detonators. We further demonstrated that malicious
software running on the scanner console can manipulate
rendered images to conceal contraband.

Our ﬁndings suggest that the Secure 1000 is ineffective
as a contraband screening solution against an adaptive
adversary who has access to a device to study and to use
for testing and reﬁning attacks. The ﬂaws we identiﬁed
could be partly remediated through changes to procedures:
performing side scans in addition to front and back scans,
and screening subjects with magnetometers as well as
backscatter scanners; but these procedural changes will
lengthen screening times.

Our ﬁndings concerning the Secure 1000 considered as
a cyberphysical device are more mixed. Given physical
access, we were able to replace the software running on
the scanner console, again allowing attackers to smuggle
contraband past the device. On the other hand, we were
unable to compromise the ﬁrmware on the system control
board, a fact we attribute to the separation of concerns
embodied in, and to the simplicity of, the scanner design.
The root cause of many of the issues we describe
seems to be failure of the system designers to think ad-
versarially. That failure extends also to publicly available
evaluations of the Secure 1000’s effectiveness. Addi-
tionally, the secrecy surrounding AITs has sharply lim-

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  381

13

ited the ability of policymakers, experts, and the gen-
eral public to assess the government’s safety and security
claims.

Despite the ﬂaws we identiﬁed, we are not able to cate-
gorically reject TSA’s claim that AITs represent the best
available tradeoff for airport passenger screening. Hard-
ened cockpit doors may mitigate the hijacking threat from
ﬁrearms and knives; what is clearly needed, with or with-
out AITs, is a robust means for detecting explosives. The
millimeter-wave scanners currently deployed to airports
will likely behave differently from the backscatter scanner
we studied. We recommend that those scanners, as well
as any future AITs — whether of the millimeter-wave or
backscatter [34] variety — be subjected to independent,
adversarial testing, and that this testing speciﬁcally con-
sider software security.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the many people who contributed to the
preparation of this report, including Michael Bailey, Nate
Cardozo, Cindy Cohn, Prabal Dutta, Jennifer Granick,
Nadia Heninger, Daniel Johnson, Daniel Kane, Brian
Kantor, Falko Kuester, Sarah Meiklejohn, Kurt Opsahl,
Stefan Savage, Daniel Scanderberg, Alex Snoeren, Geoff
Voelker, Kai Wang, and the anonymous reviewers. We
also thank the outstanding staff members at UCSD and
the University of Michigan who helped us navigate the
legal and regulatory landscape and made studying the
device possible. This material is based in part upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship Program.
References
[1] M. M. Ahlers. TSA removing “virtual strip search” body
scanners. CNN, Jan. 2013. http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/
18/travel/tsa-body-scanners.

[2] American Association of Physicists in Medicine. Radi-
ation dose from airport scanners. Technical Report 217,
June 2013. http://www.aapm.org/pubs/reports/RPT_217.
pdf.

[3] American National Standards Institute. Radiation safety
for personnel security screening systems using X-ray or
gamma radiation. ANSI/HPS N43.17-2009, Aug. 2009.

[4] D. Bowen et al. “Top-to-Bottom” Review of voting ma-
chines certiﬁed for use in California. Technical report,
California Secretary of State, 2007. http://sos.ca.gov/
elections/elections.vsr.htm.

[5] F. Cerra. Assessment of the Rapiscan Secure 1000 body
scanner for conformance with radiological safety stan-
dards, July 2006. http://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/
assets/pdf/research/rapiscan_secure_1000.pdf.

[6] CNN. Shoe bomb suspect to remain in custody. CNN, Dec.
2001. http://edition.cnn.com/2001/US/12/24/investigation.
plane/.

[7] A. H. Compton. A quantum theory of the scattering of

X-rays by light elements. Physical Review, 21(5):483,
1923.

[8] J. Corbett. $1B of TSA nude body scanners made worth-
less by blog: How anyone can get anything past the scan-
ners, Mar. 2012. http://tsaoutofourpants.wordpress.com/
2012/03/06/1b-of-nude-body-scanners-made-worthless-
by-blog-how-anyone-can-get-anything-past-the-tsas-
nude-body-scanners.

[9] J. Danzer, C. Dudney, R. Seibert, B. Robison, C. Harris,
and C. Ramsey. Optically stimulated luminescence of
aluminum oxide detectors for radiation therapy quality
assurance. Medical Physics, 34(6):2628, July 2007.

[10] Department of Homeland Security, Ofﬁce of Inspector
General. Transportation Security Administration’s use
of backscatter units. Technical Report OIG-12-38, Feb.
2012. http://www.oig.dhs.gov/assets/Mgmt/2012/OIG_12-
38_Feb12.pdf.

[11] Department of Homeland Security, Science and Tech-
nology Directorate. Compilation of emission safety re-
ports on the L3 Communications, Inc. ProVision 100
active millimeter wave advanced imaging technology
(AIT) system. Technical Report DHS/ST/TSL-12/118,
Sept. 2012. http://epic.org/foia/dhs/bodyscanner/appeal/
Emission-Safety-Reports.pdf.

[12] EPIC. Transportation agency’s plan to x-ray travelers
should be stripped of funding, June 2005. http://epic.org/
privacy/surveillance/spotlight/0605/.

[13] K. Fu. Trustworthy medical device software. In Public
Health Effectiveness of the FDA 510(k) Clearance Process:
Measuring Postmarket Performance and Other Select Top-
ics: Workshop Report, July 2011.

[14] M. E. Hoppe and T. G. Schmidt. Estimation of organ and
effective dose due to Compton backscatter security scans.
Medical Physics, 39(6):3396–3403, 2012.

[15] J. Hubbard.

New jail

to have x-ray scanner
used for security at airport. Wilkes Journal-Patriot,
Oct. 2013. http://www.journalpatriot.com/news/article_
95a398bc-368d-11e3-99ec-0019bb30f31a.html.

[16] R. Hughes. Systems and methods for improving directed

people screening, June 12 2012. US Patent 8,199,996.

[17] ivw-agne. Rapiscan Secure 1000 DP (Dual Pose) backscat-
eBay listing, 2012.

ter body scanner / nacktscanner.
http://www.ebay.com/itm/Rapiscan-Secure-1000-DP-
Dual-Pose-Backscatter-Body-Scanner-Nacktscanner-/
110999548627.

[18] Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Labora-
tory. Radiation safety engineering assessment report
for the Rapiscan Secure 1000 in single pose conﬁgura-
tion. Technical Report NSTD-09-1085, version 2, Aug.
2010.
http://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/assets/pdf/
research/jh_apl_v2.pdf.

[19] R. G. Johnston. Adversarial safety analysis: Borrowing the
methods of security vulnerability assessments. J. Safety
Research, 35(3):245–48, 2004.

[20] P. A. Jursinic and C. J. Yahnke. In vivo dosimetry with
optically stimulated luminescent dosimeters, OSLDs, com-
pared to diodes; the effects of buildup cap thickness and
fabrication material. Medical Physics, 38(10):5432, 2011.

382  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

14

[21] L. Kaufman and J. W. Carlson. An evaluation of airport
X-ray backscatter units based on image characteristics.
Journal of Transportation Security, 4(1):73–94, 2011.

[22] B. Kenna and D. Murray. Evaluation tests of the SECURE
1000 scanning system. Technical Report SAND 91-2488,
UC-830, Sandia National Laboratories, Apr. 1992.

[23] K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno,
S. Checkoway, D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson,
H. Shacham, and S. Savage. Experimental security analy-
sis of a modern automobile. In Proc. 31st IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy, pages 447–62, May 2010.

[24] A. Kotowski and S. Smith. X-ray imaging system with

active detector, Dec. 16 2003. US Patent 6,665,373.

[25] D. Kravets. Court oks airport body scanners, rejects con-
stitutional challenge, July 2011. http://www.wired.com/
threatlevel/2011/07/court-approves-body-scanners/.

[26] R. Langner.

To kill a centrifuge: A technical
analysis of what stuxnet’s creators tried to achieve.
Online: http://www.langner.com/en/wp-content/uploads/
2013/11/To-kill-a-centrifuge.pdf, Nov. 2013.

[27] A. Lowrey.

My visit

to the ofﬁces of Rapis-
can, which makes airport scanners.
Slate, Nov.
2010. http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/
2010/11/corporate_junket.html.

[28] J. L. McCrohan and K. R. Shelton Waters. Response
to UCSF regarding their letter of concern [40], Oct.
2010. http://www.fda.gov/Radiation-EmittingProducts/
RadiationEmittingProductsandProcedures/
SecuritySystems/ucm231857.htm.

[29] A. Medici. Guess where TSA’s invasive scanners are now?
Federal Times, May 2014. http://www.federaltimes.com/
article/20140516/DHS/305160012/Guess-where-TSA-s-
invasive-scanners-now-.

[30] S. J. Murdoch, M. Bond, and R. Anderson. How certiﬁ-
cation systems fail: Lessons from the Ware report. IEEE
Security & Privacy, 10(6):40–44, Nov–Dec 2012.

[31] National Security Agency.

Cottonmouth-iii. Der
Spiegel, 2013. http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/
a-941262.html, fetched 2014-02-27.

[32] OSI Systems. OSI Systems receives $25m order from U.S.
Transportation Security Administration for advanced imag-
ing technology. Press release, Oct. 2009. http://investors.
osi-systems.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=413032.

[33] Phantom Laboratory. The rando phantom, ran100 and
ran110, 2006. http://www.phantomlab.com/library/pdf/
rando_datasheet.pdf.

[34] J. Plungis.

Naked-image scanners to be removed
Bloomberg News, Jan. 2013.

from U.S. airports.
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-01-18/naked-
image-scanners-to-be-removed-from-u-s-airports.html.

[35] Secure 1000 Personnel Scanner Operator’s Manual. Rapis-

can Systems, Aug. 2005.

[36] Rapiscan Systems.

Rapiscan secure 1000, 2005.

http://epic.org/privacy/surveillance/spotlight/0605/
rapiscan.pdf.

[37] Rapiscan

Systems.

Rapiscan

522b,

2006.

http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/threatlevel/2014/
02/RapiScan-522B.pdf, fetched 2014-02-27.

[38] Rapiscan Systems. Rapiscan Secure 1000 health and
safety fact sheet, 2012. http://www.rapiscansystems.com/
extranet/downloadFile/24_Rapiscan%20Secure%
201000-Health%20and%20Safety-Fact%20Sheet.pdf.

[39] G. D. Rossides. TSA Reply to Rep. Bennie G. Thompson,
Feb. 2010. http://epic.org/privacy/airtravel/backscatter/
TSA_Reply_House.pdf.

[40] J. Sedat, D. Agard, M. Shuman, and R. Stroud. UCSF
letter of concern, Apr. 2010. http://www.npr.org/assets/
news/2010/05/17/concern.pdf.

[41] A. Shahid. Feds admit they stored body scanner images,
despite TSA claim the images cannot be saved, Aug.
2010.
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/
feds-admit-stored-body-scanner-images-tsa-claim-
images-saved-article-1.200279.

[42] S. W. Smith. Secure 1000, concealed weapon detection sys-
tem, 1998. http://www.dspguide.com/secure.htm, fetched
2014-02-27.

[43] S. W. Smith. Re: Misinformation on airport body scanner
radiation safety, Dec. 2010. http://tek84.com/downloads/
radiation-bodyscanner.pdf.

[44] S. W. Smith. Resume, 2014. http://www.dspguide.com/

resume.htm, fetched 2014-02-27.

[45] C. Tate. Privacy impact assessment for the Secret Service
use of advanced imaging technology, Dec. 2011. http://
epic.org/foia/dhs/usss/Secret-Service-Docs-1.pdf.

[46] M. Taylor, R. Smith, F. Dossing, and R. Franich. Robust
calculation of effective atomic numbers: The Auto-Zeff
software. Medical Physics, 39(4):1769, 2012.

[47] Transportation Security Administration. Contract with
rapiscan security products,
IDV ID:
HSTS04-07-D-DEP344, http://epic.org/open_gov/foia/
TSA_Rapiscan_Contract.pdf.

June 2007.

[48] Transportation Security Administration. Passenger screen-
ing using advanced imaging technology: Notice of pro-
posed rulemaking. Federal Register, 78(58):18287–302,
Mar. 2013.

[49] Transportation Security Administration Ofﬁce of Security
Technology. Procurement speciﬁcation for whole body
imager devices for checkpoint operations. TSA, Sept.
2008. http://epic.org/open_gov/foia/TSA_Procurement_
Specs.pdf.

[50] TSA. AIT: Frequently Asked Questions, May 2013.

http://www.tsa.gov/ait-frequently-asked-questions.
Fetched May 17, 2013: https://web.archive.org/web/
20130517152631/http://www.tsa.gov/ait-frequently-
asked-questions.

[51] TSA Press Ofﬁce.

TSA takes next

steps

privacy,

enhance

passenger

further
http://www.tsa.gov/press/releases/2011/07/20/
tsa-takes-next-steps-further-enhance-passenger-privacy.
[52] TÜV SÜD America. EMC test report: Secure 1000 WBI,
Feb. 2009. http://epic.org/privacy/body_scanners/EPIC_
TSA_FOIA_Docs_09_09_11.pdf, pages 162–323.

to
2011.

July

[53] U.S. Army Institute of Public Health. Rapiscan Secure
1000 Single Pose dosimetry study. Technical report,
Jan. 2012. http://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/assets/
pdf/foia/ﬁnal_ait_dosimetry_study_report_opa.pdf.

15

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  383

[54] U.S. Department of Homeland Security Ofﬁce of Health
Affairs. Fact sheet: Advanced imaging technology (ait)
health & safety, 2010. http://www.oregon.gov/OBMI/docs/
TSA-AIT_ScannerFactSheet.pdf.

[55] C. Wain.

Lessons from lockerbie.

BBC, Dec.
1998. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/special_report/1998/12/
98/lockerbie/235632.stm.

[56] XM Materials. Material safety data sheet XM-03-X
(Comp C-4 explosive simulant), Oct. 1999. http://www.
xm-materials.com/MSDS/xray_msds/msdsxm_03_x.pdf.
[57] XM Materials. Material safety data sheet XM-04-X
(Semtex explosive simulant), Oct. 1999. http://www.xm-
materials.com/MSDS/xray_msds/msdsxm_04_x.pdf.

A Radiation Dose Assessment
The Secure 1000 generates low-energy X-rays (50 kVp at
5 mA tube accelerating potential) to construct its images.
Although this output is low, the machine still produces
ionizing radiation, and careful assessment is necessary to
ensure public safety.

The imparted dose has been scrutinized recently by
various agencies applying a number of experimental de-
signs [2, 14, 53]. These ﬁndings have been consistent with
manufacturer claims [38] that per-scan radiation exposure
to subjects is nonzero, but is near natural background
levels. Additionally, there have been claims and counter-
claims surrounding the distribution of dose within the
body, with some groups raising concerns that the scanner
might impart a minimal deep dose but an overly large skin
dose to the subject [5, 40, 43].

To shed light on this question, we executed a brief as-
sessment of the radiological output of the scanner using
Landauer Inc.’s InLight whole body dosimeters. These
dosimeters give a shallow dose equivalent (SDE), a deep
dose equivalent (DDE), and an eye lens dose equivalent.
They are analyzed using optically stimulated lumines-
cence (OSL), an established dosimeter technology [9, 20].
We read the results using Landauer’s proprietary Mi-
croStar dosimeter reader.

We used a simple experimental design to quantify the
dose output: we arranged 21 dosimeters on a RANDO
chest phantom positioned upright on a wooden table with
a neck-to-ﬂoor distance of 144 cm and a source-to-detec-
tor distance of 66 cm, approximating the conditions of a
normal scan. The dosimeters give a more accurate dose
representation if the incident beam is perpendicular to
the detector material. In this case, the dosimeters were

attached to the chest phantom without regard for beam
angle, and so no correction factors were implemented;
geometry issues were expected in the results.

The InLight dosimeters require a total dose of at least
50 µSv to be accurate. To irradiate them sufﬁciently, we
performed 4033 consecutive single scans in the machine’s
normal operating mode. (Each screening consists of at
least two such scans: one front and one rear.) A scan was
automatically triggered every 12 s and lasted 5.7 s, for a
total beam-on time of 6 h 23 min.

We read the dosimeters the following day. A small loss
of dose due to fade is expected, but for the purpose of this
study we regard this decrease as negligible. We applied
the standard low-dose Cs-137 calibration suggested by
Landauer. Initially, we were concerned that the low en-
ergy output of the scanner (50 kVp tube potential emits
an X-ray spectrum centered roughly in 16 keV–25 keV)
would lead to inaccurate readings on the InLights, but
since the dosimeters are equipped with ﬁlters, the dose
equation algorithm in the MicroStar reader can deduce
beam energy without a correction factor applied to the
662 keV energy from the original calibration.

The average DDE per scan for all the dosimeters was
calculated to be 73.8 nSv. The average SDE per scan
was 70.6 nSv, and the average eye-lens dose per scan was
77.9 nSv. The standard deviation (σ) and the coefﬁcient
of variation (CV) value of all the dosimeters for the DDE
were 0.75 and 0.10 (generally low variance) respectively.
For the SDE and lens dose, σ and the CV were 1.26 and
0.16, and 2.08 and 0.29, respectively.

An unexpected aspect of our results is that the measured
DDE is higher than the SDE, and this occurrence is worth
further examination. The irradiation geometry of the
dosimeters could possibly explain this irregularity.
It
might be productive to conduct further experiments that
account for this effect.

The doses we measured are several times higher than
those found in the recent AAPM Task Group 217 re-
port [2], but they still equate to only nominal exposure:
approximately equal to 24 minutes of natural background
radiation and below the recommendation of 250 nSv per
screening established by the applicable ANSI/HPS stan-
dard [3]. A person would have to undergo approximately
3200 scans per year to exceed the standard’s annual expo-
sure limit of 250 µSv/year, a circumstance unlikely even
for transportation workers and very frequent ﬂiers.

384  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

16

