Understanding the Dark Side of Domain Parking
Sumayah Alrwais, Indiana University Bloomington and King Saud University; Kan Yuan, 
Indiana University Bloomington; Eihal Alowaisheq, Indiana University Bloomington and  

King Saud University; Zhou Li, Indiana University Bloomington and RSA Laboratories; 

XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University Bloomington

https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity14/technical-sessions/presentation/alrwais

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security Symposium.August 20–22, 2014 • San Diego, CAISBN 978-1-931971-15-7Open access to the Proceedings of  the 23rd USENIX Security Symposium is sponsored by USENIXUnderstanding the Dark Side of Domain Parking

Sumayah Alrwais1,2, Kan Yuan1, Eihal Alowaisheq1,2, Zhou Li1,3 and XiaoFeng Wang1

1Indiana University, Bloomington

{salrwais, kanyuan, ealowais, xw7}@indiana.edu
2King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

3RSA Laboratories
zhou.li@rsa.com

Abstract
Domain parking is a booming business with millions of
dollars in revenues. However, it is also among the least
regulated: parked domains have been routinely found to
connect to illicit online activities even though the roles
they play there have never been clariﬁed. In this paper,
we report the ﬁrst systematic study on this “dark side” of
domain parking based upon a novel inﬁltration analysis
on domains hosted by major parking services. The idea
here is to control the trafﬁc sources (crawlers) of the do-
main parking ecosystem, some of its start nodes (parked
domains) and its end nodes (advertisers and trafﬁc buy-
ers) and then “connect the dots”, delivering our own traf-
ﬁc to our end nodes across our own start nodes with other
monetization entities (parking services, ad networks, etc)
in-between. This provided us a unique observation of the
whole monetization process and over one thousand seed
redirection chains where some ends were under our con-
trol. From those chains, we were able to conﬁrm the
presence of click fraud, trafﬁc spam and trafﬁc stealing.
To further understand the scope and magnitude of this
threat, we extracted a set of salient features from those
seed chains and utilized them to detect illicit activities on
24 million monetization chains we collected from lead-
ing parking services over 5.5 months. This study reveals
the pervasiveness of those illicit monetization activities,
parties responsible for them and the revenues they gener-
ate which approaches 40% of the total revenue for some
parking services. Our ﬁndings point to an urgent need
for a better regulation of domain parking.

Introduction

1
Consider that you are a domain owner, holding a few do-
main names that you do not have a better use of. Then
one thing you could do is to “park” them with a do-
main parking service to earn some extra cash: whenever
web users type in those domain names (probably acci-
dentally) in the browser’s address bar, the parking ser-
vice resolves the domains to advertisement laden pages,

the revenue generated in this way is then split between
the parking service and the domain owner. Such domain
parking monetization is a million-dollar business [29],
offering a unique marketing channel through newly ac-
quired, underdeveloped domains, or those reserved for
future use. However, with a large number of parked do-
mains being monetized through those services ( Sedo
reported to have 4.4M parked domains in 2013 [29] ),
what becomes less clear is the security implications of
such activities, particularly whether they involve any il-
licit operations, a question we attempt to answer.
Dark side of domain parking. Prior research shows
that once malicious domains (e.g., those hosting a Trafﬁc
Distribution System, TDS) have been discovered, they
often end up being parked [17], i.e. temporarily hosted
by some domain parking services. Those domains come
with a large number of backlinks through which they can
still be visited by the victims of the malicious activities
they were once involved in, such as compromised web-
sites. Web trafﬁc from those backlinks is clearly of low
quality but apparently still used by the parking services to
make money [17]. More problematically, a recent study
reveals suspicious redirections performed by some park-
ing services could be related to click spam [10], though
this could not be conﬁrmed. This ﬁnding echoes what we
observed from the redirection chains collected by crawl-
ing parked domains, some of the URLs on the chains
carried URL patterns related to ad click delivery even
though our crawler did not click on any link at all (Sec-
tion 2.3). Also malicious web content has long been
known to propagate through parked domains [14, 20].

With all such suspicions raised, it is still challenging
to determine whether some parking services are indeed
involved in illicit activities, and if so the types of roles
they play there. The problem is that parking services’
monetization decisions and strategies cannot be directly
observed from the outside. Therefore, in the absence of
information about the nature of input trafﬁc to those ser-
vices and the actual ways it has been monetized, all we

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  207

have is guesswork. For example, even though we did
observe redirection chains seemingly related to click de-
livery, without knowing a parking service’s interactions
with its ad network, we were still left with little evidence
that what we saw was indeed click fraud. Note that park-
ing services do not need to play conventional tricks, such
as running click bots [21] or using hidden iframes em-
bedded in a compromised page, to generate fraudulent
clicks, and therefore will not be caught by standard ways
in click fraud detection. In the presence of such technical
challenges, little has been done so far to understand the
illicit activities that can happen during the monetization
of parked domains.
Our study.
In this paper, we report the ﬁrst attempt
to explore the dark side of domain parking and uncover
its security implications. This expedition is made pos-
sible by an innovative methodology to inﬁltrate parking
services. More speciﬁcally, we purchased a set of do-
mains and parked them with those services. Those do-
mains, together with our crawler that continuously ex-
plored parked domains, enable us to control some in-
puts to the parking services. On the receiving end, we
launched ad campaigns and made purchases of web traf-
ﬁc through the ad network or the trafﬁc sellers associ-
ated with those parking services. By carefully tuning pa-
rameters to target web audience we controlled, we were
able to connect the dots, receiving the trafﬁc generated
by our crawler going through our parked domains and
onto our campaign websites. This placed us at a unique
vantage point, where we could observe complete mone-
tization chains between the start and the end nodes we
controlled.

By analyzing such monetization chains, we were sur-
prised to ﬁnd that domain parking services, even highly
popular ones such as PS51, shown in Table 1, are indeed
involved in less-than-legitimate activities that should
never happen: our ad campaigns were charged for the
“click” trafﬁc produced by our own crawler that never
clicked and the trafﬁc we purchased turned out to have
nothing to do with the keywords we speciﬁed; also in-
terestingly, we found that for all the visits through our
parked domains and hitting our ads, only some of them
were reported to our domain-owner’s account (i.e. their
revenues shared with us), though all of them were billed
to our ad account.

To further analyze the scope and magnitude of those
problems, which we call click fraud, trafﬁc spam and
trafﬁc stealing respectively, we ﬁngerprinted those con-
ﬁrmed illicit monetization chains with a set of salient fea-
tures called stamps, and utilized them to identify mone-
tization activities on 24M visits to parked domains not

1Throughout this paper, we anonymize the identities of domain
parking services found to be participating in illicit activities due to legal
restrictions imposed by Indiana University and RSA.

going through our end nodes (i.e. ad/trafﬁc campaign
websites). New ﬁndings reveal that even leading domain
parking services are involved in illegitimate operations.
On the other hand, such operations were present in only
about 5% of the trafﬁc we observed, which indicates that
those services are largely legitimate. Possible motiva-
tions behind their opportunistic attacks could be mon-
etizing less reputable (secondary) domains (e.g., taken-
down malicious domains) that are difﬁcult to proﬁt from
legitimately, or making up for revenue losses. Further-
more, we conducted an economic study to estimate the
revenues of such dark-side activities, which we found to
be signiﬁcant.
Contributions. The contributions of the paper are out-
lined as follows:
• New methodologies. We performed the ﬁrst system-
atic study of illicit activities in parked domain moneti-
zation. This study was made possible by a suite of new
methodologies that allowed us to inﬁltrate domain park-
ing services and collect a set of complete monetization
chains. We further expanded such “seed” chains over a
large number of redirection chains collected from parked
domains over a 5.5-month period, which laid the foun-
dation for understanding the unique features and the im-
pacts of those activities.
• New ﬁndings. Our study brought to light a set of inter-
esting and important ﬁndings never reported before. Not
only did we conﬁrm the presence of illegitimate opera-
tions including click fraud, trafﬁc spam and trafﬁc steal-
ing during the monetization of parked domains, but we
also reveal the pervasiveness of those activities which af-
fect most leading parking service providers and attribute
it to account for up to 40% of their total revenue. Also
interesting is the discovery of unique features of those
illicit activities and their relations with different moneti-
zation strategies and parking service syndicates.
2 Parked Domain Monetization
2.1 Background
Domain parking. As described before, a parked do-
main is a registered domain name whose owner does not
have a better use of it than temporarily running it as an
ad portal to proﬁt from the trafﬁc the domain receives.
To this end, the owner typically chooses to park the do-
main with a domain parking service, an intermediary be-
tween the owner and various monetization options (ex-
plained later). This is done by setting up an account
with the service, and the owner forwards her domain
trafﬁc to the parking service as speciﬁed by its regula-
tions. The most common way for doing this is through
the Domain Name System (DNS), in which the parked
domain’s Name Server (NS) or Canonical Name record
(CNAME) is set to point to that of the parking service.

208  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

In this way, the service gains complete control on the
parked domain and any trafﬁc it receives. Alternatively,
the domain owner can choose to log her domain trafﬁc
before redirecting it to the parking service through HTTP
redirections.

Parking services provide a domain owner with a plat-
form to manage her parked domains. For example, some
parking services let the owner set the keywords to be
used for the parked domain monetization. Also, a do-
main owner can monitor their domain earnings through
revenue reports.
Monetization options. A parked domain owner can
proﬁt from her domain trafﬁc through a number of mone-
tization options. The most popular ones are search adver-
tising and direct-navigation trafﬁc monetization, as elab-
orated below:
• Search advertising. In search advertising (aka., spon-
sored search), the advertiser runs a textual ad campaign
with a search ad network and selects a set of target key-
words for displaying her ads. To serve these ads, the
publisher may operate search-related services such as
search engines and toolbars, or use in-text advertising
techniques (i.e. when the mouse hovers on a target word,
the ad is displayed) to identify the right context for ad-
vertising: for example, it shows ads associated with the
target words that are included in the search terms entered
into search engines or the toolbars. Parking services are
one of such publishers who provide textual ads relevant
to the names of parked domains.

Search advertising is made possible through pay-per-
click (PPC) XML feeds as illustrated in Figure 1. A pub-
lisher submits a search query for certain keywords (rele-
vant to the domain names, in the case of parked domains)
and receives relevant ads in the XML format, which also
include the bidding price per ad from the advertisers. The
publisher in turn picks up a set of ads to display. Once
a user opts to click on an ad, the click trafﬁc is bounced
through a number of hosts such as click servers before
reaching the advertiser’s web page. This click is paid for
by the advertiser and the revenue generated in this way
is shared between the publisher and the ad networks.

Popular

search ad networks

such as Google
AdWords and BingAds are considered to be top-tier
(premium), while other less reputable ones are 2nd-tier
or lower. Compared with other ad networks, top-tier net-
works offer a higher rate per click (CPC) to the publisher
and a better click fraud detection to the advertiser.
• Direct navigation trafﬁc (PPR). Direct navigation traf-
ﬁc (aka., type-in trafﬁc) is generated when the web user
enters a domain name as a query and expects to be
redirected to a related domain. For example, one may
type in “ﬁndcheaphotels.com” in the address bar and
land at mytravelguide.com. This is caused by

1- User visits 
parked domain

4- Parking Page

With contextual ads

2- Request PPC Ads 

relative to 

domain name 

keywords

3- XML Ad lising

Parking Sever

PPC XML Server

5- User clicks 

on a 

textual ad

6- Redirect

 to

 Advertiser

Advertiser

 
Figure 1: Legitimate PPC XML feed operation.

Click Servers

(i.e. search sites)

a direct-navigation-trafﬁc purchase in which the owner
of mytravelguide.com purchases through a direct
navigation system the trafﬁc related to keywords “travel”
and/or “hotels”, for example. Parked domains can serve
such a direct navigation system by redirecting type-in
trafﬁc to them who ultimately redirect it to trafﬁc buyers
like mytravelguide.com. This monetization option
is called Pay-Per-Redirect (PPR) or zeroclick.
2.2 Ecosystem and Illicit Monetization

Domains

(Start Nodes)

Expired

Malicious

New

Traffic 

Monetization 

Options

Domain 
Parking

Parking Services

Traffic 

Monetization 

Platforms

Top Tier Search 
Ad Networks 

(PPC)

2nd Tier Search 
Ad Networks 

(PPC)

Traffic 
Exchange 
Systems (PPR)

Affiliate 
Marking
(CPA)

Customers
(End Nodes)

Advertiser

Traffic 
Buyer

Brand 
Name

Others,

E.g. Branding 

Systems

& Domain Leasing

 

Figure 2: Domain Parking Ecosystem

Domain parking services have a signiﬁcant hold in the
domain industry. Table 1 shows some of the most pop-
ular parking services investigated in our study. By look-
ing at the ranks of the domain names associated with
the companies running these parking services, we ﬁnd
that many of them are ranked among the top 100k by
Alexa [2]. Also shown in the table is the total num-
ber of parked domains observed on Feb. 25th accord-
ing to DailyChanges [34]. Note that the list maintained
by DailyChanges is not comprehensive. Nevertheless,
it is quite clear from Table 1 that parking services in-
deed cover a large number of domains. Here we describe
our understanding of its ecosystem, based on our analy-
sis of a large amount of data collected from the domains
under leading parking services. Such an understanding
also leads to the suspicion of illicit activities within this
ecosystem which motivates this research.
Infrastructure. Figure 2 illustrates the infrastructure of
the domain parking ecosystem, as revealed by the redi-
rection chains observed during our crawling of parked
domains. Those domains are the start nodes for the

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  209

# Parking Service

2,827,350

32,850

4,072,159

Global
Rank
39,901
19,973
21,446
78,275
59,248
11,357
62,369

Chains
348,534
94,794
82,258
141,174
174,410
108,956
135,946
7,505
53,851
7,764

# Parked
Domains
512,206
1,101,050
1,615,644
261,357
1,275
136,243
330,032
132,455
406,872
1,290,732

# Parked # Monetization
Domains
17,160
11,850
9,972
6,447
3,606
2,782
1,020
562
315
151

1 Above
2 PS1
3 PS2
4 PS3
5 PS4
6 PS5
7 PS6
8 Rook Media
9 Fabulous
10 InternetTrafﬁc
Table 1: Top 10 Parking services in our data set. The number
of monetization chains is not the same as the number of parked
domains since each parked domain was crawled multiple times
during our collection period. Note that parking services found
in this paper to carryout illicit activities are anonymized as
“PS#”.
whole ecosystem. They include expired domains with
back links, blacklisted domains (e.g., exploit servers or
TDSes [17]) seized or taken down then repurchased by
domain owners or newly acquired domains. As illus-
trated in the ﬁgure, parked domains forward their traf-
ﬁc to parking services, which in turn select the most
proﬁtable monetization option in real time, based upon
a set of characteristics of the trafﬁc such as its geoloca-
tion, browser type and domain keywords. Occasionally,
a parking service chooses to forward the trafﬁc to another
parking service when the latter offers a higher return on
a speciﬁc trafﬁc instance. In addition, a parking service
may collaborate with trafﬁc monetization platforms (e.g.
Skenzo.com), which monetize different types of trafﬁc
such as parking trafﬁc, error trafﬁc (i.e. 404 not found
pages) and non-existent domains. Here, we refer to this
type of partnership as parking syndication.

Alexa [2] DailyChanges [34]

Our data set

some suspicious activities that call

The end targets of any trafﬁc monetization option can
be either an advertiser, a trafﬁc buyer or a brand name,
which are the end nodes of the infrastructure.
Potential
illicit monetization activities.
In our
study, we discovered, during our crawling of parked
domains,
into
question the legitimacy of some monetization op-
erations.
Speciﬁcally, we found that some URLs
on the redirection chains initiated by our crawler
contain patterns related to the delivery of clicks,
for example, “http://fastonlinefinder.com/
ads-clicktrack/click/newjump1.do?”. The
problem is that our crawler never clicked on any URLs.
It just visited a parked domain and followed its (au-
tomatic) redirection chain (see Section 2.3). Also,
we observed a lot of “shady” search websites (e.g.,
fastonlinefinder.com), which look like search
engines but return low-quality ad results. Those search
sites are also observed in prior research [18, 4] and have
been presumed to be related to malicious activities like
click fraud and malware delivery.

However, conﬁrming the presence of illicit activities in

domain monetization is challenging. Take click fraud as
an example. We need to determine whether the crawler
trafﬁc has indeed been monetized as clicks, which can
only be conﬁrmed at the advertiser end. Further com-
plicating this attempt is the observation that some park-
ing services try to make the click delivery look like
zeroclick monetization (PPR) by bouncing the trafﬁc
through entities with indications of “zeroclick” in the
URL: for example, a visit to a parked domain is ini-
tially redirected to http://bodisparking.com/
tracking?method=zeroclickrequest before
moving to the click URL. Also, malware scanning can-
not ﬁnd any malicious payloads from the trafﬁc collected
from parked domains. Most importantly, given that the
trafﬁc for domain monetization goes down a complicated
redirection chain, including ad networks and parking-
service syndication, it becomes highly nontrivial to iden-
tify the party responsible for a malicious activity, even
when its presence has been conﬁrmed.
2.3 Overview of Our Study
Here we describe at a high level what we did in our re-
search to understand the suspicious activities that happen
within this domain parking ecosystem.
Data collection. As discussed above, the data used in
our study was collected from crawling parked domains.
For this purpose, we implemented a dynamic crawler as a
Firefox extension and deployed it to 29 Virtual Machines
(VMs). The crawler is designed to simulate a user’s visit
to a URL through a browser by rendering its content and
running scripts. All such content and HTTP trafﬁc (such
as redirections) generated are collected and dumped into
a database. In this way, the crawler is able to gather the
information produced by execution of dynamic content.
Those crawlers worked on a list of parked domains,
which was updated every 3 days during the past 5.5
months (August 1st, 2013 to January 20th, 2014). Those
domains were discovered by reverse-lookup for the NS
records of known parking services (a list built manually)
using the PassiveDNS set (DNS record collection) pro-
vided by the Security Information Exchange [30].
In
order to investigate the monetization activities through
those domains, we constructed a monetization chain for
each URL visit. A monetization chain is a sequence of
URL redirections (e.g. HTTP 302, iFrame tags, etc.) ob-
served during a visit to a parked domain, including ad
networks and trafﬁc systems related to monetizing the
visit.

During each visit, each crawler randomly picked one
of 48 user agent strings covering popular browsers, op-
erating systems and mobile devices. Overall, we made
about 24M visits to over 100K parked domains. From
all those visits, we identiﬁed 1.2M (5%) monetization
chains including redirections (not direct display of ads).

210  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

The leading parking services involved in those chains are
presented in Table 1.
Inﬁltration and expansion. To identify illicit activities
involved in the monetization of parked domains and un-
derstand the scope and magnitude of the problem, we
performed an inﬁltration study on the domain parking
ecosystem to gain an “insider” view about how those
parking systems operate. This is critical for overcom-
ing the barriers mentioned in Section 2.2. More specif-
ically, we ran our crawlers to collect data from parked
domains and also parked domains under our control with
major parking services. Additionally, we launched a few
ad campaigns and also purchased trafﬁc associated with
some keywords. By carefully selecting the parameters at
our discretion, we were able to “connect the dots”, link-
ing the start nodes (domains) or trafﬁc sources (crawlers)
under our control to our end nodes (ad or trafﬁc pur-
chase campaigns) on monetization chains. Those chains
(called seeds), together with the accounting information
we received from related parking services and ad net-
works, reveal the whole monetization process with re-
gard to our inputs. This enables us to identify the pres-
ence of click fraud, trafﬁc stealing (failing to report mon-
etized trafﬁc) and trafﬁc spam (low-quality trafﬁc). We
elaborate this research in Section 3.

To understand the impacts of those fraudulent activ-
ities, we extracted from the seed monetization chains a
set of ﬁngerprints, or stamps, to identify the monetiza-
tion method used. Once a monetization chain is identi-
ﬁed as either PPC or PPR, we infer the presence of illicit
activities. Our research shows that our approach accu-
rately identiﬁes illicit monetizations through known ad
networks and trafﬁc systems. Most importantly here, this
approach helps us expand those seeds to a large number
of monetization chains collected by our crawlers. Over
those chains, we performed a measurement study, which
shows the pervasiveness of the problems, their unique
features and the proﬁts the parking services get from the
illicit activities. The study and its outcomes is reported
in Section 4 and Section 5.
Adversary model. In our research, we consider that the
parking service is untrustworthy, capable of manipulat-
ing the input trafﬁc it receives and its accounting data to
maximize its proﬁts at other parties’ cost. It also cloaks
frequently to avoid being detected by third parties. On
the other hand, the service cannot change its interfaces
with legitimate ad networks: it needs to make the right
calls to deliver its trafﬁc to the networks. In the mean-
time, some less reputable ad networks (2nd-tier or lower)
may not be trustworthy either, which adds complexity to
assigning blame to different parties involved in a known
fraudulent activity.

In practice, parking services are actually legitimate

companies. What we found is that they apparently be-
have legitimately most of time but are indeed involved in
illicit operations occasionally. This adversary is actually
very unique, since they blur the lines between fraudulent
and legitimate transactions and conduct operations with
highly questionable practices.
3 Dark Side of Domain Parking
In this section, we report on our inﬁltration of the domain
parking ecosystem. As discussed before, what we did
is to control trafﬁc sources (crawlers), some start nodes
(parked domains) and some end nodes (ad campaigns
& trafﬁc purchases) of the ecosystem, to get end-to-end
monetization chains going through them, as depicted in
Figure 3. The ﬁgure shows that the chains are as follows:
from our parked domains to our end nodes, that is, adver-
tisers or trafﬁc buyers (in black); from other parked do-
mains to our end nodes (in red); from our parked domains
to other end nodes (in green) and from our crawlers but
not through our domains or end nodes (in blue). Among
those chains, the black and red chains connect our traf-
ﬁc source, crawler, to our end nodes through parked do-
mains, which are used as the ground truth for validating
our ﬁndings (Section 3.3) and the seeds for detecting il-
licit activities on other chains (Section 4).

Inﬁltrating End Nodes

Below we describe how we inﬁltrated the ad networks
and direct trafﬁc navigation systems on the end-node side
and the parking services on the start-node side.
3.1
Here we walk through our inﬁltration of the end nodes of
the ecosystem, which includes a few steps: we need to
identify the right targets (ad networks or trafﬁc systems),
register with them, launch ad campaigns and set the right
parameters to maximize the chances of receiving our own
crawling trafﬁc.
Target identiﬁcation and registration. To identify the
most popular targets, we inspected a sample dataset, in-
cluding monetization chains collected during the ﬁrst
two weeks of August 2013, to collect a set of the most
prevalent top and 2nd-tier ad networks and direct nav-
igation systems. This turned out to be rather straight-
forward for some targets (e.g., the Looksmart ad net-
work with a domain name looksmart.com), but not
so for others. For example, for some ad networks (e.g.
Advertise), only the domains of the “shady” search
websites they utilized showed up on their click URLs;
the “masters” of those search domains were not revealed
from their whois records, which indicated either an
anonymous registration or missing organization names.
To uncover those ad networks, what we did include us-
ing a domain’s Autonomous System Names (ASN) or
other domains sharing its IP addresses to determine its
afﬁliation, as well as comparing an ad network’s contact

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  211

Parked 
Domain

Parked 
Domain

Parked 
Domain

Parked 
Domain
Parked 
Domain
Parked 
Domain
Parked 
Domain

Parking 
Service

Parking 
Service

Parking 
Service

Parking 
Service

Parking 
Service

Web

Crawler
(48 UA)

Search Ad Network

Search Sites

Ad Hosts

PPC Ad

 

servers

Direct Navigation Traffic 

System

Traffic hosts

Search Ad Network

Search Sites

Ad Hosts

PPC Ad

 

servers

Chains from our parked domains to our end nodes

Chains from other parked domains to our end nodes
Chains from our parked domains to other end nodes

Chains from other parked domains to other end nodes

Advertiser

Advertiser

Traffic 
buyer

Traffic 
buyer

Advertiser

Advertiser

 

Figure 3: Types of monetization chains captured in our data set where the dashed boxes represent entities under our control.

information with that on the domain’s whois record.

Once a set of targets (ad networks and trafﬁc systems)
were identiﬁed, we attempted to register with them as
an advertiser or a trafﬁc buyer. This happened with fake
identities whenever possible, for the purpose of conceal-
ing our true identity to avoid cloaking activities, but we
had to use our real information for some of them, which
asked for IDs such as driver’s license and a credit card.
All together, we successfully afﬁliated ourselves with 15
out of 25 top ad networks and trafﬁc systems identiﬁed.
For those we failed to do so, the main cause was that they
only accepted large-budget customers.
Campaign creation and parameter tuning. We set up
a search-like website (Figure 7 in Appendix) and hosted
it on three domains, one for trafﬁc purchasing and the
other two for advertising. Using those domains, we cre-
ated both advertising and trafﬁc purchasing campaigns.
Speciﬁcally, for each of them; we selected 10 keywords
related to our own parked domains, and also constructed
our target URLs, given to the ad networks or trafﬁc sys-
tems, to communicate a set of data (e.g., ad network
names, publisher IDs, keyword used, etc.)
to be used
to identify monetization chains that end at our websites
through our crawlers. Table 2 summarizes our inﬁltration
meta-data.

For each campaign, we carefully adjusted its parame-
ters to maximize the chances of getting trafﬁc from our
own crawlers, which provided us with the end-to-end
monetization chains we were looking for. The strate-
gies for such parameter tuning varied across different
ad networks and trafﬁc systems. Speciﬁcally, some of
them offered geo-targeting, which we leveraged to aim
at the city our crawlers were located. When this was
not available, we tried to take advantage of other features
such as browser type and timing when offered. Particu-
larly, for the browser feature, our campaign opted to tar-
get the least common browser type, which our crawlers

also used for their user agents. Additionally, the timings
of some campaigns were tuned in a way that they only
ran when trafﬁc from sources other than our crawlers
was minimal, for example, from 12AM-6AM and 10PM-
12AM. As an example, the direct navigation trafﬁc sys-
tem DNTX provided only country-level geo-location and
the platforms (iOS, Android, BlackBerry and others) un-
der its mobile/tablet category. In this case, we targeted
our campaigns at the country our crawlers were running
from and the Blackberry platforms.

Overall, we ran advertising and trafﬁc campaigns
through all 15 ad and trafﬁc networks starting from Nov.
22nd last year, which cost us $2,260 in total. The lo-
gistics of our end node inﬁltration campaigns are sum-
marized in Table 3. Among those campaigns, the two
with Admanage lasted for only two days before we were
locked out from our account for almost a month with-
out giving any explanations. Also, our campaign with
Approved Search did not receive any trafﬁc that ﬁt
our targeting criteria.

Inﬁltrating Start Nodes

3.2
To inﬁltrate start nodes, we went through top 10 most
popular parking services identiﬁed from our sample
dataset (Section 3.1), opened accounts with them and
carefully chose our monetization options so as to max-
imize the chance of observing illicit activities.
Parking service registration. Among all the services
we tried, Domain Power asked for real identity infor-
mation, which we skipped, and trafficZ turned down
our application, citing the small volume of trafﬁc our do-
mains received. Other parking services performed some
type of authentication, such as sending a PIN number to
a valid phone number, and verifying the consistency be-
tween the owner information on our domains’ whois
records and that on our application. We passed those
checks and used fake identities to register with 7 parking

212  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

Parked domains

Target Keywords
Target URL example

FREE-JOBS.INFO, JOBS-BOARD.INFO, REAL-JOBS.INFO, NEWS-CHANNEL.BIZ, NEWS-FEED.BIZ, FAMILY-VACATION.ORG
DREAM-VACATION.ORG, COUPONS-FREE.INFO, LOCAL-COUPONS.INFO, SUPERCOUPONS.INFO, CLOTHES-SHOP.INFO
DESIGNER-CLOTHES.INFO, TEAMXYZ.INFO, XYZAGENT.INFO, LOWCOST-FLOWERS.COM, EDITING-SOFTWARE.ORG
EDUCATION-RESOURCES.ORG, EDUCATION-GUIDE.ORG, MARKETING-EDUCATION.ORG, CITY-CARS.NET, MUSIC-LIVE.ORG
SOFWTARE.COM, NEWS-NETWORK.BIZ
Jobs, Cars, News, Vacation, Coupons, Clothes, Software, Education, Music, Flowers
http://anwers.net/search.php?s=advertise&c=camp7&type=kw&kw=jobs&aff=63567&geo=us_in_bloomington

Table 2: Inﬁltration meta-data. The URL example indicates the ad network is “Advertise”, click keyword is “Jobs” and the publisher
ID is “63567”.

Campaign Total AVG Budget # Targeting

Network

adMarketplace
Advertise
Google AdWords
Afﬁnity+
Approved Search
Bidvertiser
Bing Ads+
Ezanga
Looksmart
Avenue5
Admanage
7search+

Type
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPC
PPR
PPC
PPR
PPR
PPR

2 Country & Time

Hits CPC/CPR ($) Days
143
18
1
371
0
0
6
35
131
0
0
3
146
1
29
106
25

0.2
0.067
1.86
0.3
0.05
0.1
0.97
0.21
0.19
0.05
0.4
0.1
0.1
0.058
0.056
0.2
0.201

100.13 18 City & Time
125.17 17 City, Device & Time
222.71 32 City & Device
250.36 17 City & Time
10.5
160.13 28 Country
33.06
47.92
91.1
44.25
43.6
297
203

30 City, Device, Time
33 City & Time
30 City & Time
37 Country & Time
2 Country
26 Country, Device
29 & Time
155.89 13 Country
27 & Device
203.5
5 City, Device & Time
31.8
250
43 Country

DNTX
Adspark
Trellian
Table 3: End node Inﬁltration Logistics. + Networks that re-
quired registration with a real identity. “Total hits” represent
click/trafﬁc hits received at our web server and initiated by our
crawler. Note that 7Search offered both PPC and PPR cam-
paign types and as such, we created two campaigns with it, one
for each type.
services as illustrated in Table 4. Most of these services
are indeed popular as shown earlier in Table 1.

#
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Parking Service
PS5
PS2
PS6
PS1
PS4
Rook Media
PS7

# Parked Domains

9
2
6
4
3
2
2

Table 4: Parking Inﬁltration Logistics. Note that the total num-
ber of domains does not add up to 23 which is due to moving
some domains between parking services. Note that PS7 is not
shown in Table 1 as it is not in the top 10 parking services.

Domain monetization. We purchased 23 domains un-
der a number of top level domains and parked them with
the 7 services. The names of those domains were care-
fully chosen to match the keywords we targeted in our
campaigns (see Table 2). We also set their NS records
to point to those of their corresponding parking services,
with some exceptions discussed later.

Our preliminary analysis on data crawled from park-
ing services showed that suspicious activities were only
observed on redirection chains. Therefore, we tried to
avoid situations like PPC listings, where a set of PPC
ads are displayed on a parking landing page.
Instead,
we chose not to have such a page (displaying signs like
“for sale”), so the parking services can monetize the traf-

ﬁc our domains received through redirections. Actu-
ally, one parking service, Bodis, allowed us to explic-
itly set this monetization option by redirecting the trafﬁc
instead of setting the NS record to Bodis. For exam-
ple, we parked the domain news-network.biz with
Bodis by using the GoDaddy forwarding service to
send our domain trafﬁc to http://bodisparking.
com/news-network.biz.
3.3 Findings
Through inﬁltrating the start and end nodes of the
ecosystem and crawling domains hosted by popular
parking services, we were able to collect 1,015 mone-
tization chains that link our crawlers to our end nodes
(our advertising or trafﬁc purchase websites), sometimes
through our start nodes (parked domains). Using those
chains as the ground truth, we conﬁrmed the presence of
illicit activities during parked domain monetization, in-
cluding click fraud, trafﬁc spam and trafﬁc stealing, as
elaborated below.
Click fraud. Out of all the ad clicks delivered to our
advertising websites through parking services, 709 were
found to come from our own crawlers. They are clearly
fraudulent since our crawlers were designed not to click
on any ad (Section 2.3). Table 3 details the number of
clicks received from our crawler through each ad net-
work.
Trafﬁc spam.
The 4 trafﬁc purchasing campaigns
we launched received 306 trafﬁc hits from our crawler
through domains parked with parking services. Upon
examining the parked domains that served as the start
nodes on those monetization chains, we found that 83
of them were totally unrelated to the keywords we pur-
chased from the direct trafﬁc systems. Table 5 provides
examples of spam and good-quality trafﬁc.

Spam

19jj.com, ib2c.com.cn

Keyword
Music
Software almacenyhostpublico.com
Coupon
“Others” brf.no, betovilla.com,gddfg.com education-guide.org

thepiatebay.org, itunesstore.de
linuxfab.cx,iphoneos3.com
coupons-free.info

seattleseoforum.com

Not Spam

70263.com, facebooki.pl

dolla.com

Table 5: “Spam” and “Not Spam” examples of parked domains
appearing in trafﬁc purchase monetization chains leading to our
trafﬁc buyer website. “Others” represents instances where the
purchased keyword was not propagated through to our trafﬁc
buyer URL but it is still evident from the spam examples that
they are not related to any of the 10 keywords we purchased.

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  213

Trafﬁc stealing. Occasionally, parking services were
found to be dishonest with domain owners, failing to
inform them for part of the revenue they were sup-
posed to share with the owners. Speciﬁcally, we cross-
examined the revenues of the domains under our control
and the billing reports for the ad/trafﬁc campaigns we
launched. This revealed that some monetization chains
going through our parked domains were not reported to
us (domain owners) but charged to our campaign ac-
counts.

For example, we conﬁrmed the existence of traf-
ﬁc stealing from monetization chains captured by our
crawler connecting three of our domains (parked with
PS5) and our PPR campaign with 7Search. This was
achieved through comparing the billing reports provided
by 7Search, the parked domains’ revenue reports pro-
vided by the parking service and the related monetization
chains with the right combination of time stamp, source
IP address, referral domain and keyword.
It turns out
that we, as a campaign owner, were billed for 23 traf-
ﬁc hits by 7Search (see Figure 6(b) in Appendix) but
nothing was reported by the parking service (see Fig-
ure 6(a) in Appendix) in December 2013. We show the
breakdown of the crawlers’ trafﬁc in Table 6. Clearly,
the parking services kept the rightful share away from us
as the owners of the parked domains. Note that not all
requests from our crawler were billed by 7Search be-
cause they limit the trafﬁc hits by one IP address and
a valid visiting period (our campaign was set to run
between 12AM-6AM and 10PM-11:59PM ). Addition-
ally, we found other monetization chains, captured by
our crawler and monetized by the same parking service
through other ad networks such as Advertise that
have not been reported on our parked domains’ revenue
reports.

Parked Domain
Coupons-free.info
Real-jobs.info
News-feed.info

Crawler

24
23
21

0
0
0

16
5
2

Trafﬁc Reported by

Parking Service

Billed by 7search

Table 6: Trafﬁc stealing through 3 of our parked domains in the
month of December, 2013.

4 Fingerprinting Monetization Chains
Through the inﬁltration study, we conﬁrmed the pres-
ence of illicit activities in the monetization of parked do-
mains. What is less clear, however, is the pervasiveness
and impact of those activities. Understanding of this is-
sue cannot rely on the 1,015 seed chains (reported in Ta-
ble 3) whose trafﬁc sources and end nodes were under
our control. We need to identify the illicit operations oc-
curring on other monetization chains, particularly those
blue and green ones in Figure 3, which do not connect
to our ad/trafﬁc campaigns. To this end, we developed a
technique that ﬁngerprints the monetization options ob-

served on our seed chains. These ﬁngerprints, which we
call stamps, were used to “expand” the seed set, captur-
ing the illicit activities on other monetization chains col-
lected by our crawlers over months.

4.1 Methodology
The idea. As discussed above, the problem of detecting
illegitimate operations, which we did not have a direct
observation of, comes down to identifying the monetiza-
tion options they involve. More speciﬁcally, as soon as
we know exactly how a parking service monetizes a visit
from our crawler, we can immediately ﬁnd out whether
a fraudulent activity occurred: clearly, the PPC option
is a fraudulent click, as our crawler never clicked; when
it comes to PPR, we check the consistency between the
keywords expected by the end nodes and the names of the
parked domains the trafﬁc went through (see Section 5
for details). Therefore, the question here becomes how
to determine which options have been used in a given
monetization chain.

Actually, even though those options might not be ev-
ident on a monetization chain, we know that it must
go through a corresponding monetization party (ad net-
works, trafﬁc systems, etc.) before the trafﬁc gets to the
end node. This needs to happen for accounting purposes:
for example, if a click has not been sent to a PPC ad
network, the ad network never knows about it and there-
fore will not be able to pay its publisher or bill its ad-
vertiser. Also, the last few URLs leading to the end node
are clearly related to the monetization party. As an exam-
ple, let us look at a monetization chain captured by our
crawler in Table 7, which was initiated by a visit to a do-
main parked with PS1 and ended at our advertiser site.
Looking backward from our URL along the chain, we
can see two URLs from fastonlinefinder.com,
a search website. The site turns out to be afﬁliated
with the Advertise ad network.
Interestingly, once
we compare this path with other chains also through the
same ad network, it becomes quite clear that they carry
a unique pattern: ﬁrst, right before the end node, the
last two URLs are always similar; second, for these two
URLs, even though they vary across different chains in
terms of search websites, the remaining part mostly stays
constant. This observation was further veriﬁed by the
click URLs for sponsored ads from the same ad network,
which we obtained by registering with Advertise as
a publisher (see Appendix for details on search sites and
sponsored click URLs).

The above example shows that we can leverage the or-
dered sequence of URL patterns to determine the pres-
ence of a monetization option. Such a sequence is a
“stamp” we utilize to expand our seed set to ﬁnd other il-
licit monetization chains within the dataset collected by
our crawlers. Following we describe the methodology

214  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

#
1,2
3
4,5
6
7
8
9

URL

http://bastak-taraneh.com/

http://otnnetwork.net/?epl=...

http://67.201.62.155/index2.html?q=...&des=

http://21735.1b2a3r4w5dgp6v.filter.nf.adlux.com/ncp/checkbrowser?key...

http://fastonlinefinder.com/ads-clicktrack/click/newjump1.do?...&terms=ticketsoftware...

http://fastonlinefinder.com/ads-clicktrack/click/newjump2.do?terms=ticketsoftware&...

http://anwers.net/search.php?s=advertise...&kw=software...

Description

Parked domain

Parking service anchor

AdLux

ad network (syndicate)

Search site for

Advertise ad network

Our Advertiser

Table 7: End-to-End monetization chain example of a visit to a parked domain leading to our advertiser page. For clarity sake, we
omit parts of the URLs.

for clustering and generalizing URLs from a monetiza-
tion party, and extracting the stamps from the URL pat-
terns.
URL-IP Cluster (UIC) generation. A speciﬁc URL of
a monetization party (ad network, trafﬁc systems, etc.)
can be too speciﬁc for ﬁngerprinting its monetization
activity. An ad network can have many afﬁliated web-
sites and each site may have multiple domains and IP
addresses. To utilize such a URL for generating a stamp,
we ﬁrst need to generalize it across those domains, ad-
dresses and potential variations in its ﬁle path and other
parameters. To this end, we clustered related URLs into
URL-IP clusters (UIC). A UIC includes a set of IP ad-
dresses for related hosts and the invariant part of the URL
(without the host name) across all members in the clus-
ter. The former describes the ownership of this set of
URLs and the latter represents their common function-
ality, which together ﬁngerprints a monetization option
with regard to an ad network or a trafﬁc system.

To cluster a group of URLs into UICs, we ﬁrst ex-
tracted the host part of a URL, replacing it with all IPs
of the domain, and then broke the remaining part of the
URL into tokens. A token is either the full path of the
URL including ﬁle name (which is typically very short
for a monetization URL) or an argument. The value of
the argument was removed, as it can be too speciﬁc (e.g.
keyword and publisher ID). Over those IP-token sets, we
ran a clustering algorithm based upon Jaccard indices for
both IPs and tokens, as follows:

1. Each URL (including an IP set and a token set) is

ﬁrst assigned to a unique UIC.

2. Two UICs are merged together when both their
IP sets and token sets are close enough (Jaccard indices
above their corresponding thresholds).

3. Repeat step 2 until no more UICs can be merged.
A pair of thresholds are used here to determine the
similarity of two IP sets (Tip) and two token sets (Ttok)
In our research, we set Tip to 0.1 and
respectively.
Ttok to 0.5, and ran the algorithm to cluster all the
URLs on the 1.2M monetization chains collected by our
crawlers. By replacing individual URLs with their cor-
responding UICs, we obtained 429K unique generalized
chains, which were further used to detect illicit activities.

Stamp extraction. The stamps for different moneti-
zation options were extracted from seed monetization
chains, after generalizing them using the aforementioned
UICs. Speciﬁcally, we utilized 715 UIC chains (general-
ized from the 1,015 chains reported in Table 3) to ﬁn-
gerprint 11 ad networks and trafﬁc systems, with one
stamp created for all the campaigns associated with a
given ad network or trafﬁc system. For this purpose,
we applied a 2-fold cross-validation approach to gener-
ate stamps and assess their effectiveness. Speciﬁcally,
we randomly split the UIC chains for each campaign
into two equal sized sets, one for stamp extraction (train-
ing) and the other for stamp evaluation (test). Over the
training set, we determined a stamp by traversing each
UIC chain backwards and selecting the sequence of UICs
shared by all the chains involving a certain ad network or
trafﬁc system. Typically the longest sequence identiﬁed
in this way became the stamp for all the chains going
through its related monetization organization. However,
for a campaign with a small number of UIC chains (e.g.
BingAds), we only utilized the last common UIC (right
before our advertiser’s URL) across all the chains as the
stamp.

All together, our approach generated stamps for 11 ad
networks and trafﬁc systems. Ad network stamps con-
tained on average two UICs while trafﬁc system stamps
were mostly one UIC in length.
4.2 Evaluation
False negative. Using all the 11 stamps generated from
the training set, we analyzed all the monetization chains
within the test set. For each campaign, its stamp was
found to match all of its monetization chains in the test
set and thus no false negative was observed.
False positives. We further evaluated the false positive
rate that could be introduced by the stamps on a dataset
containing 768M redirection chains collected by crawl-
ing the top 1M Alexa websites [2] Jan 21-31, 2014. The
purpose here is to understand whether a redirection chain
not involving clicks or trafﬁc selling can be misidentiﬁed
as a related monetization chain and whether the mone-
tization chains of one ad network or trafﬁc system can
be classiﬁed as those of another party. By applying our
stamps on the dataset, we ﬂagged 12 chains as matches
to click stamps and another 19 chains as matches to traf-

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  215

ﬁc stamps. Upon manually analyzing the 12 click chains,
we found that all of them were actually fraudulent clicks
generated by parking services (10 chains) and a trafﬁc/ad
network named CPX24 (2 chains). CPX24 in our case
generated clicks on its own hosted ads when trafﬁc from
publishers ﬂowed in. For the 19 trafﬁc chains, they were
indeed PPR monetization chains. Further, by manually
searching for a set of ad network speciﬁc domain names
such as affinity.com within the Alexa dataset, we
discovered a number of redirection chains going through
the same ad networks ﬁngerprinted by our stamps but
not involving any clicks (e.g. ad display and conversion
tracking URLs). None of them were misidentiﬁed by our
stamps as click-based monetization chains.
Discussion. Our evaluation shows that the stamps gen-
erated over UICs accurately capture all monetization
chains associated with a speciﬁc ad network or trafﬁc
system. However, those stamps are designed for ana-
lyzing the trafﬁc through individual organizations, which
is enough for our purpose of understanding the scope
and magnitude of fraudulent activities, not for detecting
those operations on any monetization chains, particularly
those belonging to other monetization parties. Also note
that we cannot use existing ad-blocking lists such as Ea-
syList [26] to serve our goal, due to its limitations: ﬁrst,
EasyList does not distinguish between a click and an im-
pression (ad display); second, search websites used by ad
networks to deliver clicks are not covered by the block
list; ﬁnally, the list fails to include the hosts and URLs of
trafﬁc monetization systems.
5 Measurements
In this section, we report our measurement study on il-
licit parked domain monetization. This study is based
upon a dataset of 1.2M monetization chains collected in
a 5.5-month span. Such data were ﬁrst labeled using the
“stamps” generated (Section 4.1) from the seed data to
identify the monetization options associated with indi-
vidual chains, and then analyzed to understand the perva-
siveness of illicit monetization practices and its ﬁnancial
impact. Here we elaborate on the outcomes of this study.
5.1 Dataset Labeling
Expansion. To perform the measurement study, we
labeled the 1.2M monetization chains collected from
crawling parked domains by “expanding” the 1,015 seed
chains (the ground truth) to this much larger dataset.
Speciﬁcally, we generated UICs over those 1.2M chains,
generalized the seed chains using those UICs, and then
extracted click and trafﬁc stamps from the seeds as de-
scribed in Section 4.1. Matching those stamps to the
generalized UIC chains in the larger dataset (429K UIC
chains), we were able to label 120,290 (28.03%) UIC
chains corresponding to 212,359 (17.1%) URL moneti-

zation chains. The labeled set includes two monetiza-
tion options, PPC (45.7%) and PPR (56.3%) where 2%
of them include both PPR and PPC monetizations on the
same chain as explained later.
Unknown set. Although many chains were success-
fully labeled, there are almost 308K UIC chains in the
dataset not carrying any stamps, which were marked
as “unknown”. Looking into this unknown set through
random sampling, we found that it exhibited consis-
tent patterns related to click delivery and trafﬁc selling
which can be added to the labeled set if we had veri-
ﬁed seed chains. For example, we found many other
ad-nets such as Adknowledge and Bidvertiser
(2.9%), and other trafﬁc monetization systems such as
Adrenalads and ZeroRedirect (19.5%). Partic-
ularly, Sendori, a trafﬁc platform, is widely present,
covering 5.4% of the chains in the dataset. 2.6% of those
chains actually led to domain name marketplaces such as
SnapNames, and a large portion (over 19.7%) of them
stop at some parking services and trafﬁc monetization
platforms (e.g. Skenzo) with error messages indicating
cloaking behavior.

5.2 Monetization Decisions
Over the labeled dataset, we analyzed the parties respon-
sible for such decisions and the way those decisions were
made, based on a categorization of the parked domains
involved.
Monetization decision maker. Finding the party that
chooses a monetization option is important, as it tells us
who is the ultimate culprit for an illicit activity. How-
ever, this is challenging, due to the syndication of mul-
tiple monetization parties, among parking services, ad-
nets and trafﬁc systems. Within our dataset, we found
that these types of syndications are pervasive (49.5%).
As an example, AdLux in Table 7 is actually a syndi-
cate of Advertise, displaying its ads and sharing its
click revenue. In the presence of a syndication, a start-
ing node’s parking service may not be responsible for
the follow-up illicit monetization, which could actually
be performed by one of its syndicates. To this end, we
identify the parking service of the starting node to be
the responsible party of a monetization chain only when
the click or trafﬁc stamp appears right after the starting
node (i.e. parked domain). When there are other enti-
ties between the parked domain and the stamp, we use a
parking-service anchor as described below.

Typically, a parking service funnels the trafﬁc from
its parked domains to a “controller” domain, which we
call a parking service (PS) anchor, for choosing a mon-
etization option. Our idea here is to locate the PS an-
chor right before a click or trafﬁc stamp. When this hap-
pens, the owner of the anchor is clearly responsible for

216  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

the monetization decision. To this end, we picked out
the most prevalent second UICs down individual mone-
tization chains (which is expected to cover over 50% of
all the chains associated with a speciﬁc parking service),
and identiﬁed its ownership using its whois records and
Name Server. Such a UIC is considered to be an anchor
for the parking service.

In our research, we identiﬁed anchors for 4 of the
most prevalent parking services in our set. Some park-
ing services such as PS6 and PS4 launder all the traf-
ﬁc through direct navigation trafﬁc systems (DNTX and
ZeroRedirect respectively) which are owned by the
parent companies of the two parking services. Since
those trafﬁc systems are used by other clients, we did
not consider them to be the anchors of the parking ser-
vice. Using the heuristic described earlier (i.e. direct
link from a parked domain to a stamp) and the list of an-
chors, we assigned each monetization chain to the park-
ing service responsible for the selection of its moneti-
zation option, as illustrated in Table 8. Here the “un-
known” category includes the chains we could not de-
termine the parties responsible for their monetizations,
due to the disconnection between the parked domain
or PS anchor and the click or trafﬁc stamp, with un-
known UICs standing in-between. For example, the
chain in Table 7 was marked as “unknown”, as the known
anchor http://otnnetwork.net/?epl= is sepa-
rated from the ad stamp there.
Impacts of domain categorization. As discussed be-
fore, our research focuses on the redirection chains gen-
erated by 1.2M out of 24M visits to parked domains.
The rest of those visits only resulted in a simple dis-
play of PPC ads, which were less likely to be used for
illicit monetization. The fact that those redirection chains
were so rare to see here can be attributed to IP cloaking.
In the meantime, we believe that this is also caused by
the way that trafﬁc from different domains is monetized.
Speciﬁcally, a parking service like Bodis often clas-
siﬁes domains into “primary” or “secondary”. Primary
domains are those accepted by top-tier search networks
(e.g. Google AdWords) to display their ads while
secondary ones are less trusted, including those serving
malicious content before taken down and the ones related
to typos of trade or brand names. The secondary domains
here are much more likely to lead to redirection chains,
as discovered in our research (illustrated by Figure 4).
Among all domains visited by our crawlers, we found
(using [6]) that only 2.9% of them were considered to
be secondary, which naturally limits the number of the
redirection chains we could observe.
5.3
In this section, we report our ﬁndings about the preva-
lence of illicit monetization practices, particularly click

Illicit Monetization

i

s
n
a
m
o
d
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

 

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Primary Domains
Secondary Domains

0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

% Redirects

 

Figure 4: Tendency towards redirect monetization of “sec-
ondary” domains. “% Redirects” represents the percentage of
redirection chains observed per parked domain.

s
t
e
n
-
d
A
C
P
P

adMarketplace
Advertise
Afﬁnity
Google AdWords
Bing Ads
Looksmart
Ezanga

s 7Search -Spam
m
e
t
s
y
S
c
ﬁ
f
a
r
T
R
P
P

7Search - Malware
DNTX - Spam
DNTX - Malware
Trellian - Spam
Trellian - Malware
AdsPark -Spam
AdsPark - Malware

PS6

PS5
1

10,277

PS1
9,526 1670
2,329

PS2 Others Unknown
35,704
3,576
9,904

4
730

18

7,766

43
758
45
1

189
9
9

2
1
1

21,959
3,217

1,755

385
3
666

25,776
2,924
11,781

1

18,186

143
422
1,484

2,305
113

2,183

1

Totals

18,803
22,425 13,808 1,673 39,872
(11.02%) (13.15%) (8.1%) (1%) (23.4%)

73,949
(43.4%)
Table 8: Illicit activities observed by parking services in the
labeled set. “Others” refers to some of the parking services
shown in Table 1 not necessarily anonymized.
fraud, trafﬁc spam and the malware distribution discov-
ered during our analysis of the labeled dataset. Note that
we did not measure trafﬁc stealing, as this activity could
only be observed on the monetization chains whose start
and end nodes were under our control.
Trafﬁc spam. Using the trafﬁc stamps, we discovered
119K (56.3%) trafﬁc monetization chains. To identify
the presence of trafﬁc spam on each of those chains, we
compared the keywords associated with its start node do-
main with those of its end node (assuming that end nodes
purchased keywords related to the contents of their do-
mains). This works as follows:
• Keyword generation. To generate keywords for both
the start and end nodes, we used a keyword suggestion
tool by BingAds [1], a tool widely used by advertisers
to select keywords for ad targeting. This tool automati-
cally created a list of keywords (including typos) for each
domain (start and end nodes).
• Keyword ﬁltering. At this step, we cleaned the list
of keywords, discarding common ones (“www”, “com”,
etc.). Speciﬁcally, we calculated the normalized entropy
of each word as the prior work did [31] and then removed
the 50 words with the lowest entropy (i.e. highly pop-
ular). Also dropped from the keyword list were deter-
miners, pronouns, interjection and “wh”-words (“what”,
“where”, etc.), which are unlikely to be related to speciﬁc

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  217

domain content. For this purpose, we ﬁltered out the key-
words using Stanford CoreNLP [35], a natural language
processing tool for part-of-speech tagging and stemming.
• Keyword matching. Comparing the keywords of the
start node (i.e., parked domain) with those of the end
node (trafﬁc purchase website) on a monetization chain,
we considered the chain to be trafﬁc spam if individual
keywords of its parked domain did not match any words
associated with its end node. In the case that one of these
two domains do not have any keywords, we attempted to
match the other domain’s keywords to its domain name.
If this attempt succeeds, the chain would not be consid-
ered as spam, otherwise; it would.

As a result, we found that 70.7% of all PPR monetiza-
tion chains are trafﬁc spam as illustrated in Table 8 and
attributed to each parking service and trafﬁc system. Ta-
ble 9 provides some trafﬁc spam examples received by
popular brand names.

Parked domain examples

End node
Amazon.com craigslits.com, 14.de, audii.de
Apple.com
Coupons.com 4google.com,agendo.com
Sears.com
Expedia.com pizzahutjobs.com, ﬁnancetasksforce.com

uasairways.com, cursoblogger.com

acgeo.com, backlinkscenter.info

Table 9: Examples of end nodes receiving spam trafﬁc.

Click fraud. All labeled 97K (45.7%) PPC monetiza-
tion chains are clearly fraudulent clicks, as our crawlers
never clicked on any ads. Table 8 provides a break-
down of fraudulent clicks observed from each parking
service through ad-nets for which we have a click stamp.
By taking a close look at the ad-nets involved, we found
that none of the fraudulent clicks on the top-tier networks
(Google AdWords & BingAds) could be attributed
to a parking service, due to ad-net syndications. Park-
ing services avoid clicking on top-tier ad-nets’ ads be-
cause they have a better click fraud detection system than
2nd-tier networks and as such they only happen through
ad-net syndication. Additionally, 2% of the fraudulent
clicks could not be attributed to a parking service due
to the presence of a trafﬁc stamp between the start node
(i.e parked domain) and the click stamp. For example,
domains parked with PS6 resulted in fraudulent clicks
through a trafﬁc system (DNTX) which is owned by the
same parent company of PS6, namely TeamInternet
AG.

Also interesting is the observation that not only were
the clicks delivered through those chains completely
fraudulent but they often came from parked domains
that had nothing to do with the ad campaigns at the end
nodes. Speciﬁcally, we applied the keyword generation
and matching approach described above to analyze the
relations between the parked domains on those chains
and their corresponding end nodes. This study reveals
that 61.3% of the fraudulent clicks were from parked
domains completely unrelated to the end nodes on their

(a) Revenue Estimates

0.01
0.0015
0.0004
0.0001 0.0000004

PFPPC PPPR PT S PPPC PPPA
0.97
0.0057
0.998 0.00003
0.995
0.0001
0.9997 0.00016
0.983
0.0015
0.017
0.976

0.78
0.77
0.71
0.7
0.66
0.64

0.01
0.0003
0.004

0.015
0.0073

0
0

PS5
PS1
PS3
PS2
PS6
PS4

RevFraud

Rev
40.3%
7.4%
9.3%
0.8%
18.5%
10%

(b) Description of variables used.
Probaility of monetization through the display of

Pay-Per-Click (PPC) ads.

e PPPC

t
a
m

i
t
i
g
e
L

n
e
l
u
d
u
a
r
F

PPPR Probability of monetization through Pay-Per-Redirect (PPR).
PPPA

Probaility of monetization through afﬁliate marketing,

Pay-Per-Action (PPA).

t PFPPC

Probability of monetization through a fraudulent click

on a Pay-Per-Click (PPC) ad.

PT S

Probaility of monetization through trafﬁc spam

in Pay-Per-Redirect (PPR).

Table 10: Estimates of illicit monetization revenues for selected
parking services.
chains. Also given the fact that the average cost-per-click
(CPC), which is $0.28, is twice as much as the average
cost-per-redirect (CPR) that we paid, there is no legiti-
macy whatsoever in such click-faking activities.
Malware distribution. Also discovered in our research
is parking services’ involvement (probably unwittingly)
in malware distribution. We found that many PPR mone-
tization chains were leading to malicious content, either
through drive-by downloads or through social engineer-
ing scams such as FakeAV or ﬂash player updates (see
Figure 8 in Appendix). This occurred because the trafﬁc
systems involved did not do their due diligence in de-
tecting the trafﬁc buyers who actually disseminate mal-
ware. Using content structure clustering, a technique ap-
plied by prior research [13], we concluded that at least
3.7% of the PPR trafﬁc buyers spread malware. This il-
licit activity not only hurts the victims visiting a parked
domain but also affects the parked domain when it gets
blacklisted by URL scanners such as SafeBrowsing [12],
which reduces the monetary value of the parked domain
when its owner decides to sell it.
5.4 Revenue Analysis
Model. As discussed before, parking services are unique
in that their monetization operations involve both legiti-
mate and illegitimate activities. To understand the eco-
nomic motives behind this monetization strategy, we ana-
lyzed their revenues with a model derived from that used
in prior research [23]:

Rev = Visits· (RevFraud + RevLegit )

where the total revenue Rev is calculated from the total
number of visits and the average revenue for each visit.
This average revenue is further broken down into two
components, the part from illicit monetization (RevFraud)
and that from legitimate monetization (RevLegit). These
components were further estimated as follows:

218  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

Intuitively, the above two equations describe ﬁve pos-
sible situations when a visit to a parked domain is mon-
etized: illicit activities (click fraud or trafﬁc spam) or le-
gitimate ones (legitimate click, direct trafﬁc or afﬁliate
marking monetization). The revenue component from
the illicit activities is estimated using the probability of
click fraud PFPPC and that of trafﬁc spam PPPR · PT S,
where PPPR is the probability of direct trafﬁc monetiza-
tion (PPR) and PT S is the chance of trafﬁc spam when
PPR is chosen, together with the revenues for a click
CPC and a redirect CPR. Similarly, the legitimate rev-
enue component comes from a PPC display (with a prob-
ability PPPC) given that a user clicks on one of the ads
(with a click-through rate ppclk), type-in trafﬁc (PPPR)
when it is not subject to trafﬁc spam (with a probabil-

ity P(cid:31)T S), or afﬁliate marketing (PPPA) when the user per-

forms the operation expected (with a probability ppact).
The revenues for those legitimate activities are CPC,
CPR and CPA respectively.
Results. In our analysis, we estimated all the probabili-
ties above (PFPPC, PPPR, PT S, PPPC and PPPA) using the
larger set of all 24M visits to 100K parked domains in
a 5.5-month span (Section 2.3). Also, the click-through
rate ppclk and a user’s probability of taking an action un-
der PPA were both set to 0.02, and CPA to $0.265, all
according to the prior work [23], while CPC and CPR
were determined as $0.28 and $0.14 respectively, based
on the average cost for our ad/trafﬁc campaigns.

RevFraud = PFPPC ·CPC + PPPR ·CPR· PT S
RevLegit = PPPC · ppclk ·CPC + PPPR ·CPR· P(cid:31)T S

+PPPA · ppact ·CPA

In the absence of data about the total number of vis-
its per parking service, all we could do is estimate the
portion of its income from the illicit activities to its total
revenue, based upon our data. The results are shown in
Table 10.
Discussion. From the table, we can see that even rep-
utable parking services like PS2 have at least 0.8% of its
revenue come from illicit monetizations. For others, this
revenue source is even more signiﬁcant (e.g., 40.3% for
PS5 whom we found to be aggressive in its illicit mon-
etizations). Revenue from fraudulent clicks is found to
be zero for PS6 and PS4 because, as described earlier
in Section 5.3, they are bouncing their trafﬁc through
their own trafﬁc systems and as such we can not attribute
fraudulent clicks to them. Note that our estimates here
are very conservative, due to the cloaking those services
played to our crawlers (which used a small set of IP ad-
dresses) and the limited scope of our study (which only
covered 11 ad-nets and trafﬁc systems). We expect that
the ratios of illicit revenues are much higher in practice.

6 Discussion

Domain Parking Regulation. Our study uncovers the
illicit monetizations by parking services but the underly-
ing problem is even graver. Currently, there is no regula-
tion on the behaviors of parking services, which allows
them to set up arbitrary terms of services accommodat-
ing their own beneﬁts. It is worth noting that parking ser-
vices may have started to exhibit illicit monetization ac-
tivities due to the decline in their revenues [3, 29]. Also,
our research shows they have a tendency to proﬁt from
secondary domains illicitly (Figure 4), due to the difﬁ-
culty in monetizing those domains through a legitimate
channel. Protecting the advertisers’ and trafﬁc buyers’
beneﬁts in the existence of dishonest parking services
is challenging because incoming trafﬁc can be manipu-
lated. What complicates the situation more is that ad-nets
could be owned by the company who also runs parking
services and the advertisers have no fair party to talk to.
Further, direct navigation trafﬁc (i.e. zeroclick) is being
advocated by parking services and there is no guaran-
tee on the quality of the incoming trafﬁc. Our research
discloses the dark side of parked domain monetization
which calls for serious policy efforts to regulate parking
services.

Here, we suggest several practices that could mitigate
many types of illicit monetization activities when en-
forced. First, the advertisers should be provided with
a clearer picture of the monetization activities. For ex-
ample, the types of publishers should be marked out as
well to advertisers besides their publishers’ IDs, which
helps advertisers in auditing and monitoring trafﬁc com-
ing from parking services. In fact, some ad-nets are al-
ready moving to such direction: for example, Afﬁnity,
a popular ad-net, distinguishes publishers by assigning
them types such as “in-text” and “domain zero click”.
We also suggest providing trafﬁc buyers with a way to
check the integrity of incoming trafﬁc such as passing
the domain name of each start node in the referral. En-
forcement and compliance of such mechanisms requires
the presence of a 3rd party service (i.e. policy enforcer)
in the ecosystem.
Legal and ethical concerns. There are several ethi-
cal concerns raised during our study, and we carefully
designed our experiments to address them. First, we
crawled our own parked domains which is problematic
if we earn proﬁt from it. To address this issue, we avoid
cashing in the revenues we earned from the 7 parking
services hosting our parked domains ($81.06 in total).
Second, we ignore robots.txt served by parking services
when crawling since we focused on their illicit behav-
iors. Other studies on malicious activities also ignore
the robots.txt ﬁle [17, 33, 19, 7]. Third, one may ques-
tion that the artiﬁcial trafﬁc generated by our crawler

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  219

could affect the advertisers or trafﬁc buyers. In fact, we
crawled parked domains in a moderate speed and park-
ing services have deployed mechanisms to discern artiﬁ-
cial trafﬁc and stop charging the advertisers when iden-
tiﬁed [28]. Lastly, we ran campaigns with ad-nets and
trafﬁc systems but there was no actual business running.
The websites and advertisements we set up were coher-
ent to the policies of ad-nets and trafﬁc systems. There
was no damage to visitors and we did not collect any Per-
sonally Identiﬁable Information (PII) from them.

7 Related Work
Parking services. Although domain parking services
have been here for years, little has been done to under-
stand their security implications. What comes close are
the works on typo-squatting [37, 22, 9], which reveals
that domain owners utilize this technique for proﬁt. Also,
prior research shows that malicious domains tend to be
parked once detected [27, 17]. Most related to our re-
search is the study on click spam [10], which focuses
on click-spam detection and also mentions the possible
involvement of one parking service (Sedo) in such ac-
tivities based on its JavaScript. Such code was not found
in our research. Compared with the prior work, what we
did is a systematic study on the illicit activities of parking
services, which has never been done before. This is made
possible by the new inﬁltration analysis we performed.
Our study not only conﬁrms the presence of illicit opera-
tions within parking services but also brings to light their
scope and magnitude.
Illicit activities in online advertising. Ad-related il-
licit activities have been extensively studied. Exam-
ples include click-fraud [21, 4, 5, 11, 25], drive-by-
download [18], trending-term exploitation [23] and im-
pression fraud [32]. Such prior work all looks at a con-
ventional adversary who performs malicious activities
whenever possible. The parking services, however, are
very different: they run legitimate business with adver-
tisers and ad networks. However, our study reveals that a
signiﬁcant portion of their revenues actually come from
illicit activities, which raises the awareness about this
completely unregulated business.
Inﬁltration into malicious infrastructure. To under-
stand how underground businesses work, a lot of stud-
ies attempt to inﬁltrate their business infrastructure. Ex-
amples include the work on Spam [16, 15], CAPTCHA
solving [24], blackhat SEO [36] and Pay-per-install net-
works [8]. Different from such prior research, we need
to inﬁltrate the parking monetization process without dis-
rupting its operations. This was achieved using a new ap-
proach through which we controlled some nodes on both
ends of the monetization ecosystem and managed to link
them together.

8 Conclusion
This paper reports the ﬁrst systematic study on illicit ac-
tivities in parked domain monetization. To demystify this
“dark side” of parking services, we devised an inﬁltra-
tion analysis to gain control of some start nodes and end
nodes of the parking ecosystem, and then connect the
dots, sending our crawling trafﬁc across the nodes under
our control on the both ends, with the monetization enti-
ties (domain parking services, ad networks) in-between.
This analysis provided us a unique observation of the
whole monetization process, which enabled us to con-
ﬁrm the presence of click fraud, trafﬁc spam and trafﬁc
stealing. We further expanded those seed chains to mil-
lions of monetization chains collected over 5.5 months,
using the stamps of their monetization options. Over
such data, our study revealed the pervasiveness of the
illicit monetization practices and their revenues, which
calls for policy efforts to control those illicit operations.
Acknowledgements
We thank our shepherd Damon McCoy and anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions.
We thank Yinglian Xie and Fang Yu from Microsoft Re-
search for their valuable comments. This work is sup-
ported in part by NSF CNS-1017782, 1117106, 1223477
and 1223495. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper do not neces-
sarily reﬂect the views of the NSF.
Appendix

The true operation of
the shady search sites.
fastonlinefinder.com is one of a large number
of search sites we refer to as “shady”. They are shady
in that they rarely display organic results and emphasize
on sponsored ads. Moreover, they have been reported in
previous works on click fraud [18, 4] and have been pre-
sumed malicious to some extent. Additionally, many vic-
tims have often complained about a “redirect” malware
hijacking their trafﬁc and redirecting to these search sites
as shown in Figure 5.

Through our empirical investigations, we discovered
the actual role they play. We found their true operation
was to act as click servers for search ads (similar to tradi-
tional click servers of other none search advertisements)
and as such they are owned and operated by ad-nets. An-
other use of those search sites was to set the click referral
and as such, the advertiser will assume their ad was dis-
played on the referring search site.

It is important to note here, that the use of such search
sites is not illegal. It is only misunderstood due to their
abuse by ad-net publishers. A fraudulent publisher will
use a malware or Trojan to generate clicks on their ads
and since the clicks lead to an ad-net’s search sites, the

220  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

a search service that pulls organic search results from
Google and sponsored ads from the two ad-nets we
registered with. By pulling sponsored ads from the ad-
nets, we veriﬁed the use of search sites as the click
URLs as shown in Figure 7 which shows one click
URL by Advertise that has the same URL tokens
as the URLs in Table 7. Actually, the same website,
toppagefinder.com, appeared also in our data set
and as such was in the same UIC which was a correct
association. Note that the same website used here for our
publisher was also used for our advertising and trafﬁc
buying campaigns.

sites:
&

shots

Screen

(a)
livesearchnow.com
thespecialsearch.com with Afﬁnity.

two
with

of

ad-net

search
Advertise

(b) Google search results showing malware complaints for the two
search sites.
Figure 5: Ad-net search site examples showing screen shots of
the search sites and malware related complaints by users.
search site become wrongly accused as the malicious
party.
Evidence Survey. Along our inﬁltration we collect a set
of evidence to support our ﬁndings. We start with Figure
6 which conﬁrms trafﬁc stealing by one parking service
that is not reporting trafﬁc, as shown in 6(a), which have
been monetized through 7search and veriﬁed by our
payment for the trafﬁc as shown in 6(b).

(a) Screen shot of our parked domain revenue report with the park-
ing service in question.

CLICK DATE  
(GMT-06:00) 

12/9/2013 21:46 
12/11/2013 21:00 
12/12/2013 1:05 
12/12/2013 23:26 
12/13/2013 21:52 

REFERRING DOMAIN 

http://***********/REAL-JOBS.INFO? 
http://***********/REAL-JOBS.INFO? 
http://***********/REAL-JOBS.INFO? 
http://***********/REAL-JOBS.INFO? 
http://***********/REAL-JOBS.INFO? 

IP 

Crawler IP 
Crawler IP 
Crawler IP 
Crawler IP 
Crawler IP 

KEYWORD  CPC 
$0.10 
$0.10 
$0.10 
$0.10 
$0.10 

cf job 
cf job 
cf job 
cf job 
cf job 

(b) Billing report by 7Search shows 5 billed trafﬁc hits from our
parked domain. Part of the referral is removed to anonymize the
parking service.
Figure 6: Trafﬁc stealing observed on our parked domain

Additionally, We verify the association of search sites
to ad-nets by registering with two ad-nets (Advertise
& Bidvertiser) as a publisher interested in display-
ing their sponsored ads. We set up our website with

http://toppagefinder.com/ads-clicktrack/ 
click/newjump1.do?affiliate=61816&subid
=59& terms=jobs&ai=bCMmsMK_Q… 

Figure 7: Our Advertiser, publisher and trafﬁc buyer website.

Finally, in Figure 8 we show examples of visits to
domains parked with PS5 leading to malware down-
loads through two trafﬁc systems, namely DNTX and
ZeroRedirect.

References
[1] ADS, B.

microsoft.com/.

Bing ads api.

https://developers.bingads.

[2] ALEXA.

Alexa top global sites.

http://www.alexa.com/

topsites, February 2014.

[3] ALLEMANN, A.

Sedo reports continuing decline in domain park-
https://domainnamewire.com/2013/11/12/sedo-

ing.
reports-continuing-decline-in-domain-parking/,
November 2013.

[4] ALRWAIS, S. A., GERBER, A., DUNN, C. W., SPATSCHECK, O., GUPTA,
M., AND OSTERWEIL, E. Dissecting ghost clicks: Ad fraud via misdi-
rected human clicks. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference (New York, NY, USA, 2012), ACSAC ’12, ACM,
pp. 21–30.

[5] BLIZARD, T., AND LIVIC, N. Click-fraud monetizing malware: A survey
and case study. In Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALWARE), 2012
7th International Conference on (Oct 2012), pp. 67–72.

[6] BODIS. Javascript and xml api. https://www.bodis.com/news/

javascript-and-xml-api.

[7] BORGOLTE, K., KRUEGEL, C., AND VIGNA, G. Delta: Automatic Iden-
tiﬁcation of Unknown Web-based Infection Campaigns. In Proceedings of
the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (2013),
CCS ’13, ACM.

[8] CABALLERO, J., GRIER, C., KREIBICH, C., AND PAXSON, V. Mea-
suring pay-per-install: The commoditization of malware distribution.
In
Proceedings of the 20th USENIX Conference on Security (Berkeley, CA,
USA, 2011), SEC’11, USENIX Association, pp. 13–13.

[9] COULL, S., WHITE, A., YEN, T.-F., MONROSE, F., AND REITER, M.
Understanding domain registration abuses. In Security and Privacy Silver
Linings in the Cloud, K. Rannenberg, V. Varadharajan, and C. Weber, Eds.,
vol. 330 of IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 68–79.

[10] DAVE, V., GUHA, S., AND ZHANG, Y. Measuring and ﬁngerprinting
click-spam in ad networks. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 42, 4 (Aug.

USENIX Association  

23rd USENIX Security Symposium  221

and malware.
20/discovery-of-new-suspicious-domains-using-
authoritative-dns-traffic-and-parked-domains-
analysis/, March 2013.

http://labs.umbrella.com/2013/03/

[21] MILLER, B., PEARCE, P., GRIER, C., KREIBICH, C., AND PAXSON,
V. What’s clicking what? techniques and innovations of today’s click-
bots. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Detection of
intrusions and malware, and vulnerability assessment (Berlin, Heidelberg,
2011), DIMVA’11, Springer-Verlag, pp. 164–183.

[22] MOORE, T., AND EDELMAN, B. Measuring the perpetrators and fun-
ders of typosquatting. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Financial Cryptography and Data Security (Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010),
FC’10, Springer-Verlag, pp. 175–191.

[23] MOORE, T., LEONTIADIS, N., AND CHRISTIN, N. Fashion crimes:
Trending-term exploitation on the web. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (New York, NY,
USA, 2011), CCS ’11, ACM, pp. 455–466.

[24] MOTOYAMA, M., LEVCHENKO, K., KANICH, C., MCCOY, D.,
VOELKER, G. M., AND SAVAGE, S. Re: Captchas: Understanding
captcha-solving services in an economic context. In Proceedings of the 19th
USENIX Conference on Security (Berkeley, CA, USA, 2010), USENIX Se-
curity’10, USENIX Association, pp. 28–28.

[25] PEARCE, P., GRIER, C., PAXSON, V., DAVE, V., MCCOY, D., VOELKER,
G. M., AND SAVAGE, S. The zeroaccess auto-clicking and search-
hijacking click fraud modules. Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2013-211, EECS
Department, University of California, Berkeley, Dec 2013.

[26] PETNEL, R.

Easylist.

https://easylist-downloads.

adblockplus.org/easylist.txt.

[27] RAHBARINIA, B., PERDISCI, R., ANTONAKAKIS, M., AND DAGON, D.
Sinkminer: Mining botnet sinkholes for fun and proﬁt.
In Presented as
part of the 6th USENIX Workshop on Large-Scale Exploits and Emergent
Threats (Berkeley, CA, 2013), USENIX.

[28] SEDO. Domain parking terms and conditions.

https://sedo.

com/us/about-us/policies/domain-parking-terms-
and-conditions-sedocom/?tracked=1&partnerid=
38758&language=us.

[29] SEDO HOLDING.

Sedo holding ag 6-month report.

http:

//www.sedoholding.com/fileadmin/user_upload/
Dokumente/English/Reports_2013/Sedo_Holding_6M_
Report_2013.pdf, 2013.

[30] SIE, I. Security information exchange (sie) portal. https://sie.isc.

org/.

[31] SINKA, M. P., AND CORNE, D. W. Towards modernised and web-
speciﬁc stoplists for web document analysis. In Web Intelligence, 2003. WI
2003. Proceedings. IEEE/WIC International Conference on (2003), IEEE,
pp. 396–402.

[32] SPRINGBORN, K., AND BARFORD, P. Impression fraud in online adver-
tising via pay-per-view networks.
In Proceedings of the 22Nd USENIX
Conference on Security (Berkeley, CA, USA, 2013), SEC’13, USENIX As-
sociation, pp. 211–226.

[33] STRINGHINI, G., KRUEGEL, C., AND VIGNA, G. Shady paths: Lever-
aging surﬁng crowds to detect malicious web pages.
In Proceedings of
the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer &#38; Communications
Security (New York, NY, USA, 2013), CCS ’13, ACM, pp. 133–144.

[34] TOOLS, D. Daily dns changes and web hosting activity. http://www.

dailychanges.com/, February 2014.

[35] TOUTANOVA, K., KLEIN, D., MANNING, C. D., AND SINGER, Y.
Feature-rich part-of-speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language
Technology-Volume 1 (2003), Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 173–180.

[36] WANG, D. Y., SAVAGE, S., AND VOELKER, G. M. Juice: A longitudinal

study of an seo botnet. In NDSS (2013), The Internet Society.

[37] WANG, Y.-M., BECK, D., WANG, J., VERBOWSKI, C., AND DANIELS,
Strider typo-patrol: Discovery and analysis of systematic typo-
B.
squatting.
In Proceedings of the 2Nd Conference on Steps to Reducing
Unwanted Trafﬁc on the Internet - Volume 2 (Berkeley, CA, USA, 2006),
SRUTI’06, USENIX Association, pp. 5–5.

 
(a) Screen shot of a visit to a domain parked with PS5 leading to a ﬂash
player update malware scam through the ZeroRedirect trafﬁc system. A
snapshot of the HTTP trafﬁc is also shown which illustrates the redirection
process.

 

(b) Screen shot of a visit to a domain parked with PS5 leading to malware
download through the DNTX trafﬁc system
Figure 8: Visits to parked domains leading to malware distri-
bution.

2012), 175–186.

[11] DAVE, V., GUHA, S., AND ZHANG, Y. Viceroi: Catching click-spam in
search ad networks.
In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Confer-
ence on Computer &#38; Communications Security (New York, NY, USA,
2013), CCS ’13, ACM, pp. 765–776.

[12] GOOGLE.

Safe browsing api google developers.

developers.google.com/safe-browsing/.

https://

[13] HACHENBERG, C., AND GOTTRON, T. Locality sensitive hashing for scal-
able structural classiﬁcation and clustering of web documents. In Proceed-
ings of the 22Nd ACM International Conference on Conference on Informa-
tion &#38; Knowledge Management (New York, NY, USA, 2013), CIKM
’13, ACM, pp. 359–368.

[14] HUANG, W. Parked domain numbers and trafﬁc, and more on the ex-
ploits served. http://blog.armorize.com/2010/08/parked-
domain-numbers-and-traffic-and.html, August 2010.

[15] KANICH, C., WEAVERY, N., MCCOY, D., HALVORSON, T., KREIBICHY,
C., LEVCHENKO, K., PAXSON, V., VOELKER, G. M., AND SAVAGE,
S. Show me the money: characterizing spam-advertised revenue. In Pro-
ceedings of the 20th USENIX conference on Security (Berkeley, CA, USA,
2011), SEC’11, USENIX Association, pp. 15–15.

[16] LEVCHENKO, K., CHACHRA, N., ENRIGHT, B., FELEGYHAZI, M.,
GRIER, C., HALVORSON, T., KANICH, C., KREIBICH, C., LIU, H.,
MCCOY, D., PITSILLIDIS, A., WEAVER, N., PAXSON, V., VOELKER,
G. M., AND SAVAGE, S. Click Trajectories: End-to-End Analysis of the
Spam Value Chain. In Proceedings of 32nd annual Symposium on Security
and Privacy (May 2011), IEEE.

[17] LI, Z., ALRWAIS, S., XIE, Y., YU, F., AND WANG, X. Finding the linch-
pins of the dark web: a study on topologically dedicated hosts on malicious
web infrastructures. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Symposium on Secu-
rity and Privacy (Washington, DC, USA, 2013), SP ’13, IEEE Computer
Society, pp. 112–126.

[18] LI, Z., ZHANG, K., XIE, Y., YU, F., AND WANG, X. Knowing your
enemy: understanding and detecting malicious web advertising.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer and communications
security (New York, NY, USA, 2012), CCS ’12, ACM, pp. 674–686.

[19] LU, L., PERDISCI, R., AND LEE, W. Surf: detecting and measuring search
poisoning. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer and
communications security (New York, NY, USA, 2011), CCS ’11, ACM,
pp. 467–476.

[20] MAHJOUB, D. A look at the relationship between parked domains

222  23rd USENIX Security Symposium 

USENIX Association

